d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Photo by: Ni Ni Myint/World Bank, 2014

World Bank Office Yangon

No.57, Pyay Road
(Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road)
61/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
+95 (1) 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar

Report No. 93050-MM

MYANMAR

NOVEMBER,
2 0 1 4

Ending poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity in a time 
of transition

A SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 | World Bank report

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ATM	
CBM	

ADB 
AIDS	

CESD	
CESR	
CPF	
CSO	
DB	
DFID 
DSA	
DTIS	
DU	
EAP	
EITI	
EMIS	
ESIA	
EU	
FAB	
FDI	
FESR	
FIL	
GDP	
HIV	
HRD	
ICA 
ICT	
IDP 
IFC	
IHLCA	

Asian Development Bank
Acquired	Immunodeficiency	Syndrome
ASEAN	 Association	of	Southeast	Asian	Nations
Automated	Teller	Machine
Central	Bank	of	Myanmar
CEDAW	 Committee	on	the	Elimination	of	Discrimination	against	
Women
Center	for	Economic	and	Social	Development
Comprehensive	Education	Sector	Review
Country	Partnership	Framework
Civil	Society	Organization
Defined	Benefit
Department for International Development
Debt	Sustainability	Analysis
Diagnostic	Trade	Integration	Study
Delivery	Unit
East	Asia	Pacific
Extractive	Industries	Transparency	Initiative
Education	Management	Information	System
Environmental	and	Social	Impact	Assessment
European	Union
Farmland	Administration	Body
Foreign	Direct	Investment
Framework	for	Economic	and	Social	Reform
Financial	Institutions	Law
Gross	Domestic	Product
Human	Immunodeficiency	Virus
Human	Resource	Development
Investment Climate Assessment
Information	and	Communications	Technology
Internally	Displaced	People
International	Finance	Corporation
Integrated	Household	Living	Conditions	Assessment
IHLCA-2	 Integrated	Household	Living	Conditions	Assessment	-	2
International	Labor	Organization
International	Monetary	Fund
International	Non-Governmental	Organizations
Independent	Power	Producer
Internal	Revenue	Department
Japan	International	Cooperation	Agency
Joint	Monitoring	Program
Kachin	Independence	Organization	
Karen	National	Union
Liner	Shipping	Connectivity	Index
Land	Use	Certificate
MADB	 Myanmar	Agricultural	Development	Bank
Myanmar	Development	Resource	Institute
Myanmar	Economic	Bank
Myanmar	Economic	Cooperation
Micro	Finance	Institution
Myanmar	Investment	Commission
Multiple	Indicator	Cluster	Survey
Multilateral	Investment	Guarantee	Agency
Ministry	of	Education
Ministry	of	Finance	
Ministry	of	Health

ILO	
IMF	
INGO	
IPP	
IRD	
JICA	
JMP	
KIO	
KNU	
LSCI	
LUC 

MDRI	
MEB	
MEC	
MFI	
MIC	
MICS	
MIGA	
MOE	
MOF	
MOH	

MP	

MPT	
MSE	

NGO	
NRC	
NSDS	
NTM	
OECD	

OOP	
PEFA	
PER	
PFM	
PPP	
PSC	
QSEM	

MOHT	 Ministry	of	Hotels	and	Tourism
MNPED	 Ministry	of	National	Planning	and	Economic
Development
Member	of	Parliament
MPLCS	 Myanmar	Poverty	and	Living	Conditions	Survey
Myanmar	Posts	and	Telecommunications
Microfinance	Supervisory	Enterprise
MSME	 Micro	Small	Medium	Enterprise
Non-Governmental	Organization
National	Registration	Card
National	Strategy	for	the	Development	of	Statistics
Non-Tariff	Measures
Organization	for	Economic	Co-operation	and
Development
Out-Of-Pocket
Public	Expenditure	and	Financial	Accountability
Public	Expenditure	Review
Public	Financial	Management
Public-Private	Partnership
Production	Sharing	Contract
Qualitative	Social	and	Economic	Monitoring
SABER	 Systems	Approach	for	Better	Education	Results
Systematic	Country	Diagnostic
State	Economic	Enterprise
Special	Economic	Zone
Swedish	International	Development	Agency
Social	Impact	Monitoring
State	Law	and	Order	Restoration	Council
Settlement	and	Land	Records	Department
Small	and	Medium	Enterprise
Staff	Monitored	Program
System	of	National	Accounts
State	Owned	Enterprise
Social	Protection
Skills	for	Training,	Employment,	Progression	and
Self-development
Sector	Working	Group
Trade	Support	Institution
Technical	and	Vocational	Education	and	Training
UMEHL	 Union	of	Myanmar	Economic	Holdings	Limited
United	Nations
UNCTAD	 United	Nations	Conference	on	Trade	and	Development
United	Nations	Development	Programme
UNICEF	 United	Nations	Children’s	Fund
UNODC	 United	Nations	Office	on	Drugs	and	Crime
United	States	of	America
United	States	Dollar
United	States	Department	of	Agriculture
Union	Solidarity	and	Development	Party
Vacant,	Fallow,	and	Virgin	
WASH	 Water,	Sanitization	and	Hygiene
World Bank
World Bank Group
World	Development	Report
World	Health	Organization
World	Trade	Organization

SCD	
SEE	
SEZ	
SIDA	
SIM	
SLORC	
SLRD	
SME	
SMP	
SNA	
SOE	
SP	
STEPS	

USA	
USD	
USDA	
USDP	
VFV	

WB 
WBG 
WDR	
WHO	
WTO	

SWG	
TSI	
TVET	

UN	

UNDP	

 
 
	
10 I. Country context
setting the stage

13

C. Economic growth,
structure, and
transformation

D. Rationale for a Systematic 
Country Diagnostic

16

10

A. The transformation of 
Myanmar’s polity, economy, 
and society

B. Country’s economic 
situation and historical 
context

11

17 E. Conceptual framework 
for the Myanmar SCD
F. Sources of information, 
consultations, and quality 
of data

17

6

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

II. A profile of POVERTY in myanmar

A. The incidence of poverty 
and the extent of inequality

21

25

D. Vulnerability to 
poverty

20

23

B. The spatial distribution of 
poverty

C. Characteristics of the 
poor and the correlates and 
causes of poverty

24

E. A taxonomy of the 
poor and what it
suggests about
pathways out of
poverty

25

27

III. PATHWAYS OUT OF POVERTY and
          intervention areas

28

29

A. Strategic Framework for Inclusive 
and Sustainable Growth

B. The Government’s 
reform program

C. Critical next steps

28

1. Considerations in identifying priority 
intervention areas and sequencing
29 2. Identified areas of intervention
3. Rationale for interventions

29

30

51

IV. KNOWLEDGE GAPS,
IMPLICATIONS, AND 
PROPOSPED ANALYTICAL 
WORK AGENDA

54

BIBLIOGRAPHY

4 | World Bank report

LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: Myanmar’s Unique History and Circumstances 

Box 2: What is an SCD? 

Box 3: Overview of key data issues in Myanmar 

Box 4: The Myanmar SCD consultations process 

Box 5: Comparing Myanmar’s rice yield data with other countries in the region 

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: Myanmar real GDP growth rate, 2005/06-2013/14 

Figure 2:  Growth rates for comparator countries, 2012/13 

Figure 3: Recorded export value and composition 

Figure 4:  Level and composition of exports 

Figure 5:  Sector GDP Shares 

Figure 6:  Agricultural Employment Shares 

Figure 7:  Informal Employment 

12

16

17

19

45

13

13

14

14

15

15

15

Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity 17

Figure 9: A large fraction of the population is clustered around the poverty line 

Figure 10: Small changes in the poverty line lead to large changes in poverty rates 

Figure 11: Inequality in Myanmar is relatively low 

Figure 12: Inequality varies within Myanmar 

22

22

22

22

Figure 13: Poverty rates and number of poor in 2009/2010, by agro-ecological zone 23

Figure 14: Poverty rates and number of poor in 2009/2010, by states and regions 24

Figure 15: Access to basic services 

Figure 16: Land and poverty in rural Myanmar 

Figure 17:Poverty risk by ethno-linguistic group in 2009/2010 

24

24

25

Figure 18: Pre-requisites, Pathways, and Key Intervention Areas for Poverty Reduction and  

Shared Prosperity 

Figure 19: Recent trends in Government Revenues 

Figure 20: Government revenues across countries 

Figure 21: Health expenditure shares 

Figure 22: Education expenditure shares 

30

37

37

38

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank report | 5

Figure 23: Maternal mortality rate, per 100,000 live births 

Figure 24: Secondary school gross enrollment rate, percentage 

Figure 25: Share of firms identifying issue as constraint 

Figure 26: Constraints by size of firms 

Figure 27: Doing business ranking 

Figure 28: Logistics performance index 

Figure 29: Average paddy yield, 2010-2012 

Figure 30: Rice as a share of total cereal production value 

Figure 31: Percentage of population with access to electricity 

Figure 32: Electric power consumption 

Figure 33: Number of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults 

Figure 34: Number of borrowers from commercial banks per 1,000 adults 

Figure 35: Mobile phone subscriptions per 100 people 

Figure 36: Internet users per 100 people 

LIST OF TABLES 

Table 1:  Economic Activity by Sectors of Origin 

Table 2:  Labor Productivity, Constant 2005 US$ 1 

Table 3:  Informal Employment and Poverty 

Table 4:  Myanmar: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, FY09-17 

ANNEX: LIST OF TABLES

Table A. 1: List of knowledge and data gaps that need to be filled 

Table A. 2: Summary of SCD consultation meetings and key focus areas

 identified by stakeholders 

39

39

43

43

44

44

45

45

47

47

47

47

48

48

14

14

16

34

61

65

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

1. Myanmar is going through a critical transforma-
tion in its development path - from isolation and 
fragmentation to openness and integration; and 
from pervasive state control, exclusion, and indi-
vidual disengagement, to inclusion, participation, 
and empowerment.1	 This	 dual	 shift	 is	 happening	
against	 a	 backdrop	 of	 broader	 political	 reforms	 that	
started	in	2011	when	a	new	administration	took	office.		
The	 country’s	 transition	 after	 the	 planned	 elections	 in	
2015	 will	 be	 a	 major	 test	 of	 the	 progress	 on	 political	
reforms.	There	remain	risks	of	political	instability,	policy	
discontinuity,	and	stalled	reforms	due	to	vested	interests.

2. The country’s history, demography, and geogra-
phy create a unique set of development challenges 
and opportunities: (i)	 emergence	 from	 a	 long	 peri-
od	 of	 international	 isolation;	 (ii)	 widespread	 poverty,	
despite	 rich	 land,	water,	 and	mineral	 resource	 endow-
ments;	 (iii)	 a	 strategic	 location	 in	 the	 fastest-growing	
region	 in	 the	world,	and	 the	only	country	sharing	bor-
ders	with	both	India	and	China,	with	prospects	for	rapid	
economic	growth	and	“catch-up”	improvements	in	the	
lives	of	people;	(iv)	a	dominance,	albeit	slowly	reced-
ing,	of	the	military	and	associated	groups	in	the	econo-
my,	and	(v)	progress	towards	peace	after	a	long	period	
of	conflict	in	border	areas.					

3. Despite its potential, Myanmar today is one of the 
poorest countries in Southeast Asia. With	a	popula-
tion	of	51.4	million,	 the	country	has	a	per	capita	GDP	
of	$1,105,	and	 the	poverty	 rate	 is	37.5	percent,	one	of	
the	 highest	 in	 the	 region.	 	Among	ASEAN	 countries,	
Myanmar	 has	 the	 lowest	 life	 expectancy	 and	 the	 sec-
ond-highest	rate	of	infant	and	child	mortality.	Less	than	
one-third	of	the	population	has	access	to	the	electricity	
grid,	road	density	remains	low,	at	219.8	kilometers	per	
1,000	square	kilometers	of	land	area,	and	ICT	connec-
tions	are	scarce,	with	mobile	phone	and	internet	pene-
tration	rates	at	1.1	percent	and	0.3	percent,	respectively.			
Myanmar’s	 level	 of	 development	 used	 to	 be	 on	 a	 par	
with	 countries	 such	 as	 Thailand	 and	 Malaysia	 only	 a	
few	 decades	 ago;	 today	 it	 is	much	 lower,	 comparable	
with	Lao	PDR	and	Cambodia.	

4. The low level of development can be traced to 
Myanmar’s long history of isolation, conflict, and 
military control of political and economic life. For	
most	 of	 its	 post-independence	 period,	 Myanmar	 has	
been	under	military	dictatorship	and	has	been	ravaged	
by	 conflict	 in	 the	 ethnic	 minority	 border	 areas.	 State	
controls and economic isolation resulted in suppressed 
entrepreneurship	 and	 a	 diminished	 role	 of	 the	 private	
sector,	 stagnating	 infrastructure	 and	 technology,	 un-
der-developed	 markets,	 and	 low	 levels	 of	 foreign	 di-

1 
 The term “triple transition” was used to describe the changes in 
Myanmar since a new administration took office in 2011 - from a mili-
tary system to democratic governance; from a centrally-directed, closed 
economy to a market-oriented one; and from 60 years of conflict to peace 
in the border areas.  This SCD focuses on the “dual shift” toward opening 
and integration, and toward inclusion and empowerment, to highlight the 
socio-economic changes associated with the triple transition.   

World Bank report | 7

rect	investment.	As	Myanmar	has	been	opening	up,	the	
dominance	 of	 the	military	 and	 groups	 associated	with	
it	in	the	economy	has	begun	receding,	yet	the	shift	is	a	
gradual	one.

5. Myanmar has made some progress in ending armed 
conflicts in the border areas. Bilateral	ceasefires	have	
been	 signed	 with	 several	 ethnic	 insurgent	 groups	 that	
for	 decades	 had	 been	 engaged	 in	 armed	 conflict	 with	
the	central	government.		However,	the	situation	remains	
fragile	and	a	national	ceasefire	is	still	under	discussion.		
An	important	recent	concern	is	the	recurrent	outbreaks	
of	religious	violence,	primarily	targeted	at	the	country’s	
Muslim	minorities	and	particularly	at	those	who	identi-
fy	themselves	as	Rohingya	in	Rakhine	State.  

6. Growth has accelerated since the transition, 
buoyed by improved macroeconomic manage-
ment, increased gas production and exports, and 
stronger performance in non-gas sectors due as 
the economy opened up. On	 average,	 the	Myanmar	
economy	 grew	 at	 5.1	 percent	 between	 2005/06	 and	
2009/10,	 and	 then	 at	 an	 average	 of	 6.5	 percent	 since	
the	transition.	One	of	the	key	drivers	of	this	growth	has	
been	 the	 export	 of	 natural	 gas,	 which	 is	 highly	 capi-
tal	 intensive	 and	 not	 intrinsically	 inclusive.	Manufac-
turing,	 construction,	 and	 services	 have	 also	 registered	
strong	performance	due	to	the	opening	up.	At	the	same	
time,	the	contribution	of	the	more	labor-intensive	agri-
culture	to	growth	has	been	small	and	variable. Overall, 
notwithstanding	significant	structural	change	since	the	
mid-1980s,	 driven	 by	 the	 gas	 sector,	 Myanmar’s	 cur-
rent	 economic	 structure	 resembles	 that	 of	 a	 lower	 in-
come	country.  In	2012,	agriculture	still	accounted	 for	
36.4	 percent	 of	 GDP	 (and	 employed	 over	 half	 of	 the	
workforce),	compared	to	37.3	percent	for	services	and	
26.3	percent	for	industry.		

7. This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) aims to 
identify priorities for Myanmar to reduce extreme 
poverty and boost shared prosperity. In	 line	 with	
the	WBG’s	 new	 country	 engagement	model, the	 find-
ings	 of	 the	 SCD	 will	 provide	 inputs	 for	 the	 prepara-
tion	of	 the	upcoming	Country	Partnership	Framework	
(CPF),	 which	 will	 outline	 the	WBG’s	 engagement	 to	
help	 Myanmar	 achieve	 these	 twin	 goals	 for	 its	 mem-
ber	 countries.	 Significant	 information	 gaps	 make	 this	
exercise	 a	 particular	 challenge.	 The	 	 SCD	 draws	 on	
data	 from	 various	 sources,	 including	 a	 review	 of	 ex-
isting	reports	on	Myanmar,	a	more	in-depth	analysis	of	
the	 2009/10	 Integrated	 Household	 Living	 Conditions	
Assessment	 (IHLCA)	 survey	 data	 (the	 most	 recent	
survey	 on	 poverty	 and	 living	 conditions),	 information	
from	other	non-IHLCA	surveys	such	as	the	Qualitative	
Social	and	Economic	Monitoring	 (QSEM)	survey,	 the	
Investment	Climate	Assessment	(ICA)	Enterprise	Sur-
vey	recently	conducted	by	the	World	Bank,	and	exten-
sive	consultations	with	stakeholders	across	the	country.		
Weaknesses	in	data	quality—particularly	with	regard	to	
poverty,	 national	 accounts	 and	 population—constrain	
the	analysis	in	this	SCD	(see	Box	3).

8 | World Bank report

8. Conceptually, the framework for the Myanmar 
SCD has four elements. First,	 it determines	 the	 pro-
file	of	the	poor	in	Myanmar,	in	order	to	understand	their	
characteristics,	where	they	live,	and	the	drivers	of	pov-
erty.	Second,	 it	 identifies	 the	key	pathways	 for	ending	
poverty	and	boosting	shared	prosperity.	Third,	it	deter-
mines	the	constraints	that	lie	along	these	pathways	and	
hence,	fourth,	the	possible	areas	of	intervention	for	the	
country	to	accelerate	progress	towards	ending	poverty.

9. With an estimated poverty rate of 37.5 percent in 
2010, Myanmar’s absolute poor overlap with the 
bottom 40 percent. This	poverty	rate,	based	on	an	in-
ternationally	comparable	method	of	analysis,	is	higher	
than	 an	 earlier	 estimate	 of	 26	 percent	 using	 the	 same	
2009/10	 national	 household	 survey.	 Most	 of	 the	 poor	
live	 in	 rural	 areas	 (76	 percent),	 and	 poverty	 is	 most	
heavily	concentrated	in	conflict-affected	areas:	poverty	
rates	in	Chin	State	stand	at	71	percent	and,	in	Rakhine	
at	78	percent,	both	with	 substantial	numbers	of	ethnic	
minorities.	Urban	poverty	(34.6	percent)	is	higher	than	
expected.	With	 a	 Gini	 coefficient	 of	 0.29,	 income	 in-
equality	 in	Myanmar	 is	 relatively	 low,	 compared	with	
neighboring	countries.	

10. A range of economic and social factors are respon-
sible for driving people into poverty in Myanmar.
The	key	drivers	 include	 low	 labor	productivity,	and	 in	
a	 largely	 rural	 society,	 low	 agricultural	 productivity	
(particularly	 for	 rice,	 the	 country’s	 main	 crop),	 land-
lessness,	erratic	rainfall,	 lack	of	access	 to	markets	due	
to	 poor	 rural	 infrastructure,	 internecine	 conflict	 and	
communal	 violence,	 and	 poor	 government	 policies.	
Data	also	show	that	many	households	in	Myanmar	are	
vulnerable	 to	 unanticipated	 shocks,	which	 cause	 them	
to	stay	or	to	fall	back	into	poverty.		

11. The SCD identifies three groups of poor: tradition-
al, transitional and excluded poor. The	“traditional”	
poor	are	heavily	concentrated	in	rural	areas,	have	very	
low	 levels	 of	 education	 and	 depend	 on	 agriculture	 for	
their	livelihood,	but	have	limited	access	to	key	produc-
tive	assets	and	factors	like	land	and	finance.		The	“tran-
sitional”	poor	often	live	in	urban	and	peri-urban	areas,	
have	transitioned	out	of	traditional	rural	livelihoods	but	
still	work	as	low-skill	casual	laborers.	 	Finally,	the	so-
cially-marginalized	 and	 “excluded”	poor	 are	 excluded	
from	 opportunities	 for	 productive	 economic	 activity	
for	a	range	of	reasons,	including	by	virtue	of	ethnicity	
and	geography.		The	causes	of	poverty	for	each	of	these	
groups	are	many,	with	some	that	are	common	to	all	of	
them,	and	some	that	are	specific	to	each	group.		

12. Ending the poverty of the working poor, both 
“traditional” and “transitional”, will require in-
creasing returns to their main asset—their labor.
For	 the	 majority,	 the	 “traditional	 poor”,	 who	 current-
ly	 depend	 on	 agriculture	 for	 their	 livelihood,	 this	will	
mean	both	raising	the	returns	to	agricultural	cultivation,	
while	in	parallel	facilitating	their	movement	from	low-
er	 value-added	 agriculture-related	 activities	 to	 higher	
value-added	 activities	 off	 the	 farm	 by	 stimulating	 pri-
vate-sector	job	creation.		For	the	“transitional”	poor,	the	
opportunities	 for	 private-sector	 led	 off-farm	 employ-
ment	and	income	generation	will	be	critical.	

13. Investments in human capital and better access to 
quality basic services will be critical to ending the 
poverty of all three groups of the poor — both their 
income and non-income dimensions of poverty. 
Better	access	to	primary	health	care,	water	and	sanita-
tion,	electricity,	and	basic	education	are	important,	not	
only	to	improve	well-being,	but	also	to	reduce	vulner-
ability	 to	poverty,	 enhance	 current	 income	generating	
opportunities	 and	 lower	 the	 inter-generational	 perpet-
uation	of	poverty.

14. Lastly, for the “excluded” poor—communities in 
remote conflict-affected areas, members of social-
ly-marginalized groups, families without anyone 
capable of productive work—a focus on increa- 
sing the returns to labor is unlikely to be sufficient.  
By	 definition,	 these	 groups	 have	 been	 or	 are	 likely	 to	
be	 excluded	 from	 or	 less	 connected	 to	 opportunities	
for	productive	economic	activity.	For	these	groups	the	
pathways	out	of	poverty	will	likely	have	to	include	spe-
cific	targeted	interventions	and	programs	of	assistance.	

15. Grounded in the poverty diagnostic, the SCD iden-
tifies two main pathways for ending poverty and 
boosting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The	 first	
pathway	 entails	 promoting	 openness and sustainable 
private sector-led growth	 for	 more	 jobs.	 Growth	 is	
expected	 to	 come	 from	 a	 combination	 of	 investment,	
continued	 increase	 in	 natural	 resource	 exports,	 and	
increasing	 productivity.	 A	 key	 over-arching	 principle	
is	 ensuring	 greater	 participation	 of	 the	 domestic	 and	
foreign	 private	 sector	 in	 the	 economy	 (particularly	 in	
the	sectors	with	greater	potential	for	job	creation),	fos-
tering	 integration	with	 the	global	economy,	enhancing	
labor	productivity,	and	adopting	an	integrated	approach	
to	the	management	of	its	natural	resources,	particularly	
the	Ayeyarwaddy	river	basin.	The	other	pathway	entails 
promoting	universal access to basic services and em-
powerment	 for	 inclusive	 growth,	 particularly	 in	 rural	
areas.	This	pathway	will	benefit	all	groups	of	poor.

16. Priorities for Myanmar to create jobs in manufac-
turing and services include opening up the space 
for foreign and domestic investors and facilita- 
ting access to domestic, regional, and international 
markets. One	“quick	win”	will	come	from	removing	the	
remaining	 policy	 and	 institutional	 constraints	 to	 entry	
by	 new	 domestic	 and	 foreign	 private	 sector	 investors,	

to	 the	 expansion	 of	 operations	 by	 existing	 investors,	
and	 to	 domestic,	 regional,	 and	 international	 market	
access.	 Some	 of	 the	 required	 policy	 and	 institutional	
changes	may	take	time	to	be	carried	out	or	may	be	po-
litically	 sensitive	 but	most	 can	 be	 implemented	 in	 the	
short	to	medium	term. 

17. Increasing agricultural productivity is expected to 
have a high impact on poverty, with much scope 
for short term gains. Since	 the	 majority	 of	 the	 tra-
ditional	 poor	 are	 engaged	 in	 agriculture,	 increasing	
productivity	would	 have	 a	 high	 impact	on	 poverty	 re-
duction	 as	 it	would	 increase	 returns	 to	 labor.	There	 is	
huge	 potential	 for	 improvement	 in	 Myanmar	 -	 wide	
deficiency	gaps	exist	in	rice	yields,	diversification,	and	
value-addition.	Increasing	access	to	land	and	tenure	se-
curity	 will	 support	 increased	 agricultural	 productivity	
but	great	care	will	need	to	be	taken	in	carrying	out	land	
reforms.	In	the	short	term,	the	focus	should	be	on	fully	
understanding	 the	 nature	 and	 scale	 of	 the	 problem,	 as	
well	as	carrying	out	consultations	on	the	way	forward.

18. Addressing shortages in power, an under-developed 
financial sector, shortages in skilled labor, and low 
supply of ICT services will have a significant impact. 
In	 the	 short	 to	 medium	 term,	 it	 will	 be	 important	 to	
build	 on	 efforts	 already	 underway	 to	 increase	 overall	
generation,	transmission,	and	distribution	of	electricity.	 
Similarly,	significant	progress	can	be	made	in	the	short	
term	 in	 modernizing	 and	 deepening	 the	 financial	 sec-
tor.	 Finally,	 to	 ensure	 long-term	 sustainability	 of	 pov-
erty	reduction	efforts,	it	will	be	important	for	Myanmar	
to	adopt	an	 integrated	approach	 to	 the	management	of	
the	Ayeyarwaddy	 river	basin	 and	develop	 a	nationally	
agreed	 environmental	 and	 social	 Safeguards	 frame-
work	that	is	based	on	best	practices.

19. Promoting universal access to critical services and 
extending them to the rural areas and other disad-
vantaged groups will have a high impact. Given	that	
most	 poor	 people	 in	Myanmar	 live	 in	 rural	 areas	 and	

World Bank report | 9

have	limited	access	to	critical	services,  extending	such	
services	 to	 currently	 under-served	 rural	 areas	 and	 dis-
advantaged	 groups	 (such	 as	 the	 excluded	 poor)	 is	 im-
portant	 for	 reducing	 poverty.	 Expanding	 the	 coverage	
of	the	health	system	and	the	quality	of	health	services	is	
a	priority	where	 action	 can	be	 immediately	 scaled-up.		
Increasing	 education	 services	 and	 vocational	 training	
will	 also	 be	 important	 although	 its	 impact	will	 not	 be	
realized	 in	 the	 short-term.	 Interventions	 for	 increasing	
access	to	water	and	sanitation	are	also	likely	to	have	a	
high	impact	on	poverty	reduction.	In	addition,	access	to	
electricity,	better	rural	road	connectivity,	microfinance,	
and	rural	telephone	services	all	will	empower	the	poor	
both	 by	 facilitating	 access	 to	 social	 services	 and	 en-
hancing	opportunities	 to	 engage	 in	productive	 income	
generating	activities.

20. In addition to the two main pathways, the SCD 
identifies four critical pre-requisites for Myan-
mar’s development: facilitating	 the	 political	 tran-
sition,	 enhancing	 social	 inclusion,	 maintaining	 mac-
roeconomic	 stability,	 and	 improving	 public	 sector	
capacity	 and	 governance	 for	 policy	 making,	 coordi-
nation,	 and	 service	 delivery.	 	Continuous	 action	 in	 all	
these	areas	will	be	essential	for	sustained	and	inclusive	
growth,	poverty	reduction	and	shared	prosperity.		

21. Finally, the SCD identifies various knowledge gaps 
and offers suggestions on future analytical work 
to help fill these gaps. For	example,	there	is	need	for	
further	work	to	better	understand	the	extent	and	nature	
of	poverty	in	Myanmar,	particularly	the	situation	in	the	
border	 areas,	 as	 well	 as	 update	 the	 poverty	 numbers.	
The	census	that	was	recently	conducted	is	expected	to	
provide	 an	 updated	 sampling	 frame	 for	 carrying	out	 a	
nationally	 representative	 IHLCA,	 to	 lay	 the	 basis	 for	
have	 more	 credible	 poverty	 numbers.	 Some	 of	 the	
knowledge	 gaps	 to	 be	 filled	 will	 help	 in	 identifying	
priorities	at	a	more	granular	 level	 i.e.	priorities	within	
priorities.	

I. CoUnTRY ConTEXT
SETTIng ThE STAgE 

A. The transformation of Myanmar’s polity,   
economy, and society 

1. Myanmar is going through a critical transfor-
mation in its development path characterized by 
a dual shift - from isolation and fragmentation 
to openness and integration; and from pervasive 
state control, exclusion, and individual disengage-
ment, to inclusion, participation, and empower-
ment.2 For	over	a	quarter	of	a	century,	Myanmar	was	
under	self-imposed	isolation	from	the	rest	of	the	world,	
and	under	economic	sanctions	by	the	West.	As	a	result,	
Myanmar’s	 trade	 and	 investment	 relations	 have	 been	
limited	 to	 a	 few	 countries	 in	 the	 region	 that	 it	 consid-
ered	 friendly.	 Similarly,	 the	 country	 has	 followed	 a	
fragmented	 approach	 to	 environmental	 sustainability,	
including	 the	 management	 of	 its	 key	 water	 resource,	
the	 Ayeyarwaddy	 river.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 there	 has	
been pervasive state interference and dominance in 
the	 economic	 space	 normally	 occupied	 by	 the	 private	
sector	 in	 other	 countries	while	 a	majority	 of	 the	 poor,	
particularly	 in	 rural	parts	of	 the	 country,	have	not	had	
access	 to	 certain	 critical	 services	 and	 have	 therefore	
been	disempowered	to	extricate	themselves	from	pov-
erty	 through	 participation	 in	 productive	 income	 earn-
ing	 opportunities.	 Since	 the	 transition	 started,	 these	
patterns	are	being	reversed:	the	country	has	been	open-
ing	up	to	and	integrating	with	the	outside	world	in	the	
areas	of	 trade	and	 investment,	 the	state	 is	 rolling	back	
and	encouraging	greater	private	sector	participation	 in	
many	 areas	of	 the	 economy,	while	 investments	 in	key	
services	are	being	expanded.

2. These critical socioeconomic shifts are happening 
against a backdrop of political reforms that started 
in 2011 when a new administration took office. Key	
milestones	in	the	political	transition	include	the	release	
of	 political	 prisoners	 and	 the	 opening	 up	 of	 space	 for	
the	 opposition	 through	 the	 holding	 of	 by-elections	 in	
2012	that	brought	in	a	significant	number	of	opposition	
MPs	 into	 parliament,	 including	 the	 opposition	 leader,	
Aung	San	Suu	Kyi.	

3. Myanmar’s elections next year and the transition 
to the next government will be an important test 
for progress with political reforms. An immediate 
challenge	 is	 how	 the	 country	 will	 deal	 with	 calls	 for	
various	constitutional	amendments,	including	a	provi-
sion	that	makes	the	opposition	leader	ineligible	to	run	
for	president.	

World Bank report | 11

4. Some progress has also been made towards ending 
the country’s armed conflicts in the border areas, 
although the situation remains fragile. Ceasefires	
have	been	signed	with	several	ethnic	 insurgent	groups	
that	 for	 decades	 had	 been	 engaged	 in	 armed	 conflict	
with	the	central	government.		However,	conflict	contin-
ues	with	the	Kachin	Independence	Organization	(KIO)	
in	Kachin	State,	where	armed	clashes	 increased	 in	 the	
first	half	of	2014	despite	the	KIO’s	participation	in	dis-
cussions	about	a	national	ceasefire.		In	November	2013,	
leaders	of	ethnic	armed	groups	met	at	a	“Leaders’	Sum-
mit”	 to	consider	 the	government’s	proposal	 to	begin	a	
national	 ceasefire	 process	 (i.e.	 a	 roundtable	 including	
all	 13	 armed	 groups,	 rather	 than	 a	 series	 of	 bilateral	
discussions)	 and	 formed	 a	National	Ceasefire	Coordi-
nating	 Team	 (NCCT).	 	While	 subsequent	 discussions	
between	 the	 NCCT	 and	 the	 government’s	 negotiating	
team	 underlined	 remaining	 differences	 between	 the	
two	sides,	there	remains	a	shared	commitment	towards	
a	peaceful	solution.		

5. An important additional dimension of establish-
ing peace and security across the country involves 
finding a sustainable solution to address the sys-
tematic exclusion of the Muslim minority that 
identifies itself as Rohingya in Rakhine State. The	
government	considers	members	of	this	Muslim	minori-
ty	 illegal	 migrants	 from	 neighboring	 Bangladesh	 and	
does	not	recognize	them	as	an	ethnic	group.		Following	
outbreaks	of	violence	directed	against	 this	minority	 in	
the	summer	of	2012	that	killed	89	people	and	displaced	
over	 110,000,	 the	 government	 established	 temporary	
camps	 to	 separate	communities	and	avoid	 further	vio-
lence.3	Subsequent	violence	took	place	against	Muslim	
minorities	in	Rakhine	in	2013	and	2014,	which	spilled	
over	into	broader	anti-Muslim	violence	in	other	parts	of	
Myanmar	in	2013	and	evolved	into	widespread	protests	
against	 international	 aid	 workers	 in	 Rakhine	 in	 early	
2014.4	 As	 of	 January	 2014,	 the	 number	 of	 displaced	
persons	in	Rakhine	had	reached	140,000.5

B. Country’s economic situation and historical context

6. Myanmar is one of the poorest countries in the 
South East Asian region and has certain features 
that are unique to its country context (See Box 
1). In	 2013/14,	 the	 country’s	 GDP	 was	 estimated	 at	
US$56.8	 billion.	 Based	 on	 the	 preliminary	 popula-
tion	 figure	 of	 51.4	million	 from	 the	 census	 conducted	
in	March/April	 2014,	 the	 country’s	 per	 capita	 income	
is	 therefore	 around	 US$1,105,	 one	 of	 the	 lowest	 in	
the	East	Asian	 region.	Analysis	 of	 the	 last	 nationwide	

3 
 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human 
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, August 2012.

2 
 The term “triple transition” was used to describe the changes in 
Myanmar since a new administration took office in 2011 - from a mili-
tary system to democratic governance; from a centrally-directed, closed 
economy to a market-oriented one; and from 60 years of conflict to peace 
in the border areas.  This SCD focuses on the “dual shift” toward opening 
and integration, and toward inclusion and empowerment, to highlight the 
socio-economic changes associated with the triple transition.   

4 
 International Crisis Group, Myanmar Crisis Watch, April 2014.< 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/crisiswatch/crisiswatch-da-
tabase.aspx?CountryIDs=%7b7E12FB4D-6C23-449D-AF08-550AD5FD-
2F2E%7d#results>

5 
 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of  Human 
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, September 2014. 

 
12 | World Bank report

Integrated	 Household	 Living	 Conditions	 Assessment	
(IHLCA)	conducted	in	2009/10,	found	that	26	percent	
of	 the	 population	 was	 living	 below	 the	 poverty	 line6.	
New	 calculations	 by	 the	World	 Bank	 that	 expand	 the	
consumption	basket	used	to	determine	the	poverty	line	
by	including	expenditures	on	health	and	durable	goods,	
and also takes into account spatial differentials in cost 
of	 living,	 finds	 a	 substantially	 higher	 poverty	 rate	 of	
37.5	percent7	 of	 the	population,	and	a	high	concentra-
tion	of	households	living	very	near	the	poverty	line	and	
thus	vulnerable	to	falling	into	poverty.		

Box 1: Myanmar’s Unique history and  
Circumstances

Myanmar’s	history,	demography,	and	geography	create	
a	unique	set	of	development	challenges	and	opportuni-
ties:	 (i)	emergence	 from	a	 long	period	of	 international	
isolation;	(ii)	widespread	poverty,	despite	rich	land,	wa-
ter,	and	mineral	 resource	endowments;	 (iii)	a	 strategic	
location	in	the	fastest-growing	region	in	the	world,	and	
the	 only	 country	 sharing	 borders	 with	 both	 India	 and	
China,	with	 prospects	 for	 rapid	 economic	 growth	 and	
“catch-up”	improvements	in	the	lives	of	people;	(iv)	a	
dominance,	albeit	slowly	receding,	of	 the	military	and	
associated	 groups	 in	 the	 economy,	 and	 a	 fragmented	
society	 with	 diverse	 ethnic	 and	 religious	 groups;	 and	 	
(v)	progressive	peace	after	a	long	period	of	conflict		in	
border	areas.		

Myanmar	 is	 emerging	 from	 a	 long	 period	 of	 isola-
tion,	with	a	devastating	impact	on	its	economy	and	the	
well-being	 of	 people.	 	For	 the	 past	fifty	 years,	 private	
entrepreneurship	has	been	heavily	suppressed	and	dis-
torted:	initially,	following	the	military	coup	in	1962,	by	
widespread	nationalization	of	industries	and	closure	to	
outside	markets	and	investors,	then,	following	attempts	
at	 reform	 in	 the	1990s,	by	a	 focus	on	natural	 resource	
extraction	 controlled	 by	 a	 small,	 politically	 connected	
elite.	Over	the	past	twenty	years,	this	focus	on	resource	
extraction	 was	 amplified	 by	 economic	 sanctions	 that	
further	limited	market	opportunities.	 	As	a	result,	mar-
ket	 institutions	 and	 government	 capacity	 to	 regulate	
them	 are	 nascent	 and	 trade	 and	 investment	 relations	
limited,	while	the	country’s	human	capital	has	been	de-
pleted,	 as	 the	 education	 system,	 once	 one	 of	 the	 best	
in	Asia,	withered.	 	While	 several	 other	 countries	 such	
as	Vietnam,	 Cambodia	 and	 Laos,	 have	 emerged	 from	
shorter	periods	of	isolation,	Myanmar	is	one	of	a	hand-
ful	 of	 countries	 that	 has	 remained	 largely	 isolated	 for	
almost	half	a	century.										

6 
 Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey in Myanmar 
(2009-2010):  Poverty Profile. Prepared jointly by MNPED, UNICEF, UNDP, 
and SIDA, 2011.   

7 
 The recalculated poverty rate of 37.5 percent has been present-
ed to the authorities in Myanmar who have acknowledged the fact that a 
variation in the measurement methodology shows that poverty may have 
been higher in 2009/10. However, the official figure remains 25.6 percent as 
originally published.

Myanmar’s	 reforms	 today	 and	 its	 strategic	 location	 in	
the	 fastest	 growing	 region	 in	 the	 world,	 between	 the	
two	huge	markets	of	China	and	India,	create	important	
opportunities	for	economic	development,	but	also	some	
risks.		Myanmar	is	well	placed	to	join	the	global	manu-
facturing	networks	that	have	propelled	growth	in	Asia.		
A	 young	 population	 and	 access	 to	 the	 sea	 provide	 ad-
ditional	 advantages.	 	However,	 this	 strategic	 location,	
along	with	rich	resources,	also	means	that	international	
powers	and	domestic	vested	interests	will	compete	for	
influence	in	Myanmar.	

Myanmar	enjoys	rich	land,	mineral	and	water	resourc-
es.	Exports	of	natural	gas	to	Thailand	have	been	an	im-
portant	source	of	foreign	exchange	and	macroeconomic	
stability	in	recent	years.	Exports	of	oil	are	starting	and	
exploration	is	underway	as	the	potential	for	further	finds	
are	high.		Myanmar	also	has	significant	jade	and	other	
precious	stones,	forestry	and	other	resources.	Myanmar	
is	blessed	with	a	long	coast	line	and	relatively	abundant	
rainfall.	 	 However,	 many	 of	 the	 natural	 resources	 are 
located	in	border	areas	and	their	extraction	has	contribu- 
ted	 to	 conflicts.	Myanmar’s	 strategic	 location,	 rich	 re-
sources,	and	the	interest	and	conflicts	around	them	put	
a	premium	on	strong	and	transparent	governance.	

Myanmar	has	a	long	history	of	armed	conflict	of	ethnic	
groups	along	 the	border	with	 the	country’s	central	au-
thorities,	 with	 entrenched	 patterns	 of	 political,	 social,	
and	economic	exclusion.			There	are	officially	135	dif-
ferent	ethnic	groups	in	Myanmar.	In	addition,	although	
a	large	majority	of	the	population	practices	Buddhism,	
other	religions	are	present	too,	mainly	Christianity,	Is-
lam,	and	Hinduism.	This	ethnic	and	religious	diversity	
has	been	a	source	of	tensions	and	conflict	in	the	country.		
The	main	drivers	of	exclusion	have	been	religion,	eth-
nicity	and	citizenship,	gender,	geography,	and	conflict.	
There	has	been	 long-standing	discrimination	and	mar-
ginalization	 of	 non-Buddhists,	 dating	 back	 to	 colonial	
times	 became	 highly	 visible	 recently,	 as	 deadly	 reli-
gious	violence,	particularly	directed	at	Muslim	minori-
ties,	erupted	in	various	parts	of	the	country.		Significant	
parts	of	the	country	are	not	entirely	within	the	Govern-
ment’s	controls.		The	Government	has	made	significant	
progress	in	reaching	agreements	with	the	various	ethnic	
groups	along	 the	border,	 including	 through	 the	 launch	
of	 a	 decentralization	 process,	 and	 the	 successful	 con-
clusion	 of	 ongoing	 negotiations	 will	 be	 important	 for	
sustained	development	and	poverty	reduction.	

Finally,	 almost	 unique	 to	 Myanmar	 is	 an	 attempt	 to	
address	 the	 challenges	 and	 harness	 the	 potential	 ben-
efits	all	at	once.	 	Other	transition	countries	have	either	
not	been	isolated	in	the	same	way,	had	relatively	slow	
transitions	towards	democracy	or	make	slow	economic	
transitions.	 	 Due	 to	 its	 unique	 circumstances,	 Myan-
mar	is	undertaking	multiple	challenges	simultaneously.		
The	 potential	 benefits	 are	 enormous	 and	 the	 risks	 are	
commensurately	high.

7. The low level of development can be traced to 
Myanmar’s long history of isolation, conflict, and 
military control of political and economic life. (Box	
1)	 	 For	 most	 of	 its	 post-independence	 period,	 Myan-
mar	has	been	under	military	dictatorship	and	has	been	
ravaged	by	conflict	in	the	ethnic	minority	border	areas.	
State	 controls	 and	 economic	 isolation	 resulted	 in	 sup-
pressed	 entrepreneurship	 and	 a	 diminished	 role	 of	 the	
private	sector,	stagnating	infrastructure	and	technology,	
under-developed	markets,	and	low	levels	of	foreign	di-
rect	investment.	As	Myanmar	has	been	opening	up,	the	
dominance	 of	 the	military	 and	 groups	 associated	with	
it	in	the	economy	has	begun	receding,	yet	the	shift	is	a	
gradual	one.	

C. Economic growth, structure, and transformation

8. Real growth has been accelerating ever	 since	 the	
massive	destruction	caused	by	hurricane	Nargis.  Much	
of	that	growth	was	driven	by	natural	resource	exports,	
particularly	gas.	At	the	same	time,	the	pace	of	structu- 
ral	transformation	has	been	limited. 	Labor	productivity	
has	improved,	while	the	reallocation	of	labor	appears	to	
have	 stalled.	 	A	 carefully	designed	 sequence	of	policy	
and	 institutional	 reforms	will	be	needed	 for	Myanmar	
to	realize	its	growth	potential.			

9. Growth has accelerated since the transition, but 
the economy had been growing at reasonably en-
viable rates even before then (See Figure 1 below).
On	 average,	 it	 grew	 at	 5.1	 percent	 between	 2005/06	
and	2009/10	and	could	have	been	higher	if	not	for	the	
devastation	 caused	 by	 cyclone	 Nargis	 in	 2008	 when	
growth	 slowed	 down	 to	 3.6	 percent.	 	 However,	 since	
the	transition	started,	the	economy	has	grown	at	an	av-
erage	of	6.7	percent.

World Bank report | 13

10. Myanmar’s international trade is growing rapid-
ly from a low base. 	Myanmar	 had	 long	 been	 living	
in economic isolation due to economic sanctions and 
inward-looking	policies.	The	opening	up	of	the	econo-
my	 and	 gradual	 lifting	 of	 sanctions	 have	 produced	
rapid	 growth	 in	 international	 trade,	 with	 exports	 and	
imports	of	goods	and	services	growing	at	estimated	an-
nual	average	rates	of	11	percent	and	17	percent,	respec-
tively,	 between	 2008/09	 and	 2013/14.8	 Consequently,	
Myanmar	 has	 become	 the	 second	 fastest-growing	 im-
porter	 among	ASEAN	 countries.	However,	 the	 export	
response	 in	 Myanmar	 has	 been	 slower	 than	 it	 was	 in	
Vietnam	at	the	start	of	Vietnam’s	transition,	especially	
in	the	rice	sector.

11. Exports increased substantially in 2012/13 com-
pared to 2010/11, with natural gas contributing 
the largest gains. Exports	 in	 2008/09	 were	 approxi-
mately	US$7.2	billion,	as	illustrated	in	Figure	3.	They	
increased	 to	 US$8.8	 billion	 in	 2010/11	 and	 at	 least	
US$10.3	 billion	 in	 2012/13	 with	 US$11.9	 billion	 ex-
pected	 in	 2013/14.9	 	 Between	 2010/11	 and	 2012/13,	
natural	 gas	 exports	 grew	 by	 US$1.1	 billion,	 and	 saw	
logs	and	veneer	grew	by	US$0.4	billion,	as	did	textiles,	
clothing,	and	footwear.10	Recorded	rice	exports	are	min-
imal.	There	are	indications	of		unrecorded	exports	over	
land	 to	 China	 in	 2012/13	 and	 2013/14.	 Nevertheless,	
weak	 export	 performance	 of	 non-mineral	 products	 af-
ter	three	years	of	economic	liberalization	is	a	matter	of	
concern.		There	is	also	an	opportunity	for	future	growth	
if	export	obstacles	can	be	identified	and	removed.

8 
 From IMF Country Reports.  The corresponding growth rates for 
goods based on trading partner data from the UN COMTRADE are 9 percent 
for exports and 31 percent for imports.

9 

10 

 Ibid.

 UN COMTRADE.

14 | World Bank report

12. Trade in Myanmar had been limited by both sanc-
tions and policy. An	Asian	Development	Bank	work-
ing	 paper	 suggests	 that	Myanmar	 had	 been	 trading	 at	
only	 15	 percent	 of	 its	 potential	 through	 2010.11	Figure	
4	shows	that	exports	in	2012,	as	a	share	of	GDP,	were	
far	higher	in	neighboring	countries	than	in	Myanmar.12	
For	 example,	 Vietnam	 and	 Thailand	 both	 exported	
the	 equivalent	 of	 70	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2012.	 Larger	
countries	typically	need	to	export	less,	given	their	large	
internal	 markets.	 Thus,	 India	 exported	 20	 percent	 of	
GDP	while	China	exported	27	percent	of	GDP.	Figure	
4	 also	 shows	 that	 the	 exports	 from	Myanmar’s	 neigh-
bors	had	 a	much	higher	manufactured	content.	 	Much	
of	 this	 shortfall	 was	 attributed	 to	 a	 lack	 of	 trade	 with	
industrialized	 economies.	 	 Other	 constraints	 included	
policies	 such	 as	 import	 and	 export	 licensing	 require-
ments,	 the	 old	 dual	 exchange	 rate	 system,	 and	 gov-
ernment monopolies on trade in certain commodities 

11 

 “Myanmar’s Trade and its Potential” (ADB 2013).

(rice)	 and	 categories	 (vehicles).13	 	 	 It	 is	 expected	 that	
Myanmar’s	exports	will	move	increasingly	toward	the	
level	and	composition	seen	elsewhere	as	sanctions	are	
phased	out	and	policies	improve.		As	a	sign	of	normal-
ization,	 the	United	States	 suspended	 sanctions	barring	
U.S.	investment	in	Myanmar	in	July	2012,	and	the	Eu-
ropean	Union	reinstated	trade	preferences	to	Myanmar	
under	the	EU’s	Generalized	System	for	Preferences	for	
least-developed	countries	in	July	2013.

13. The economic structure of Myanmar is consistent 
with that of a lower income country. According	to	of-
ficial	national	accounts	estimates	for	2010	summarized	
in	Table	1,	the	agricultural	sector	employed	52	percent	
of	 the	 workforce	 and	 generated	 almost	 37	 percent	 of	
GDP.	 	The	 services	 sector	 employed	36	 percent	of	 the	
workforce	 and	 produced	 37	 percent	 of	 GDP.	 	 The	 in-
dustrial	sector	employed	only	12	percent	of	the	workers	
and	generated	26	percent	of	GDP.		The	industrial	share	
of	employment	is	low	compared	to	regional	outcomes.14  
Cambodia	and	Vietnam	have	levels	of	GDP/capita	that	
are	 close	 to	Myanmar’s.	 	Their	 industrial	 employment	
shares	 in	2010	were	16	percent	and	21	percent	respec-
tively	compared	to	12	percent	in	Myanmar.		

Table 1:  Economic Activity by Sectors of origin

Sources:  UN Statistical Division for national accounts, population 
and percent of population between ages 15 and 64;  UNDP IHCLA 
2011 for all other data.

Table 2:  Labor Productivity, Constant 2005 US$ 1

1.	Defined	as	value-added	per	worker.	
2.	Value-added	per	worker	in	agriculture	divided	by	value-added	
per	worker	in	industry.

Sources:  World Development Indicators and Table 1.

13 
 According to the WTO (2014), several monopolies may still be in 
place. See Section 3.1.9 State Trading, and Section 3.2.5 Export Operations 
of State Enterprises, or State Trading.

12 
 The data has been adjusted to remove receipts from fuel exports 
from each country depicted in order to make cross-country comparisons 
easier.

14 
 This sector is dominated by manufacturing but also includes 
mining and quarrying, construction, and the provision of electricity, gas and 
water.

14. Labor productivity in Myanmar, defined as val-
ue-added per worker, is low in all sectors and is 
much lower than in most other countries in the re-
gion. Most	 comparator	 countries	 in	 East	Asia,	 except	
Cambodia	and	Vietnam,	have	substantially	higher	labor	
productivity	 in	 agriculture	 than	 Myanmar	 (see	 Table	
2).		Myanmar’s	productivity	is	the	lowest	among	these	
comparator	countries	in	services,	and	is	also	the	lowest	
except	for	Cambodia	in	industry.

15. Structural transformation has proceeded slowly 
to date. Myanmar	 is	 still	 largely	 dependent	 on	 agri-
culture	 where	 labor	 productivity	 is	 very	 low.	 	 Figure	
5	 shows	 that	 the	 agricultural	 share	 of	 GDP	 has	 fallen	
significantly	 from	 a	 peak	 of	 61	 percent	 in	 1986	 to	 36	
percent	 in	 2011,	while	 the	 share	 of	 industry	 increased	
from	less	than	10	percent	to	26	percent	over	the	period.		
This	coincides	with	the	agricultural	reform	of	1987	and	
the	formal	official	abandonment	of	the	“Burmese	Way	
of	 Socialism”	 in	 1988.15	 	 The	 share	 of	 agriculture	 in	
the	 workforce	 remained	 essentially	 unchanged	 during	
2005-2010,	per	Figure	6,	while	its	contribution	to	GDP	
has	been	declining.16		The	labor	productivity	in	agricul-
ture	 is	 the	 lowest	 compared	with	 other	 sectors.	 Labor	
productivity	 in	 manufacturing	 is	 the	 highest	 and	 over	
four-times	that	of	agriculture	(see	Table	1).	

World Bank report | 15

16. Myanmar has a large informal sector with the major-
ity of the poor. According	to	the	UNDP	IHLCA	(2011)	
report,	 own-account	workers	 represented	 40	 percent	 of	
total	 employment	 in	 2009-10.	 	 Casual	 laborers	 repre-
sented	another	18	percent,	mainly	 from	 the	 rural	areas,	
and	mainly	 in	 the	 lower	 income	deciles.	 	Unpaid	fami-
ly	workers	represent	another	15	percent.	 	Thus,	a	rough	
estimate	of	the	informal	sector	in	2009-10	would	be	73	
percent	of	the	total	labor	force.		This	estimate	is	up	4	per-
centage	points	from	the	2005	estimate	of	69	percent.		If	
agricultural	activities	are	excluded,	per	ILO	practice,	the	
share	of	the	informal	sector	in	2009-10	was	an	estimated	
57	percent.17	 	By	way	of	comparison,	according	to	ILO	
estimates,	 the	 informal	 sector	 share	 of	 non-agricultural	
employment	was	42	percent	in	Thailand	(2010)	and	68	
percent	in	Vietnam	(2009).		The	average	for	a	sample	of	
39	 lower	 and	middle	 income	 countries	was	 51	 percent	
(see	Figure	7).	 	 	Importantly,	the	household	survey	data	
in	Table	3	show	that	those	in	the	informal	sector	repre-
sent	the	dominant	share	of	the	poor	in	Myanmar.		

15 
 In response to falling rice production and exports, the gov-
ernment in 1987 decided to reduce the amount of statutory government 
procurement and gave farmers more freedom to sell the surplus in private 
markets. Although rice export was still under the state monopoly, domestic 
paddy/rice marketing was deregulated, resulting in active participation by 
private traders.  

16 
 The estimates are based on survey data.  After accounting for 
margins of error, it is unlikely that the difference between 2005 estimate of 
53.0 and the 2010 estimate of 52.4 percent is statistically significant.

17 

includes the non-professional self-employed, domestic workers, contributing 
 The job-based definition for informal sector workers from the ILO 
Hussmann (2004).
family workers, and workers in enterprises employing 5 or fewer workers.  See 

16 | World Bank report

17. The high share of natural resource exports may 
constrain opportunities for the reallocation of la-
bor. Natural	 gas	 is	 becoming	 a	 key	 driver	 of	 export	
growth	but	it	brings	new	challenges.	Myanmar	has large	
proven	reserves	of	gas	estimated	at	23	trillion	cubic	feet,	
(20	trillion	are	off-shore	and	3	trillion	on-shore),	equiv-
alent	to	more	than	46	years	of	current	production	(about	
498	billion	cubic	feet	(bcf	per	annum).		Full	scale	com-
mencement	 of	 production	 and	 exportation	 of	 gas	 was	
achieved	in	2002.	In	2014	natural	gas	exports	were	$4.2	
billion,	equivalent	 to	34	percent	of	 total	exports	and	7	
percent	of	GDP.18		The	sector	is	the	main	destination	for	
FDI,	 particularly	 with	 several	 large	 projects	 ongoing.		
As	 portrayed	 in	 Figure	 3,	 there	 are	 also	 large	 exports	
of	timber	and	smaller	exports	of	gemstones	–	although	
this	volume	is	likely	under-recorded.		Given	that	these	
sectors	are	highly	capital-intensive,	their	growth	is	not	
likely	 to	 contribute	 to	 poverty	 reduction	 unless	 reve-
nue	proceeds	from	the	sectors	are	used	in	a	manner	that	
promotes	growth	in	labor-intensive	sectors,	helps	to	ex-
pand	and	improve	public	service	delivery,	or	to	imple-
ment	 critical	 social	 protection	 programs.	 	 In	 addition,	
world	prices	for	commodities	are	generally	much	more	
volatile	 than	manufactures.	 	This	may	 create	 a	 risk	 of	
macroeconomic	 volatility	 to	 the	 extent	 that	 one	 com-
modity,	in	this	case,	natural	gas,	dominates.

D. Rationale for a Systematic Country Diagnostic 

18. Going forward, a key measure of success of the 
economic and political reforms under the tran-
sition will be the extent to which progress can be 
made towards ending poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity. The	 President	 has	 challenged	 his	 cabinet	
to	reduce	poverty	in	Myanmar	from	the	earlier	estimate	
of	26	percent	to	15	percent	by	the	end	of	this	Govern-
ment’s	 tenure,	 with	 a	 particular	 focus	 on	 rural	 pover-
ty	 reduction	 through	 “people-centered	 development.”	
While	the	specific	targets	are	ambitious,	the	main	thrust	

18 
 Consolidated public sector oil and gas revenues are those col-
lected by the oil and gas SEEs less the income and commercial taxes they 
paid to the Union.

of	 the	goal	 is	consistent	with	 the	World	Bank	Group’s	
goals	 of	 helping	 its	 member	 countries	 end	 absolute	
poverty	and	boost	shared	prosperity.	

19. The World Bank Group is undertaking a System-
atic Country Diagnostic (SCD) in order to iden-
tify priorities for accelerating progress in ending 
poverty and boosting prosperity. The	SCD	seeks	to	
identify	key	constraints	 to	 remove	and	key	opportuni-
ties	to	leverage	in	order	to	end	poverty	and	boost	shared	
prosperity,	and	hence,	priority	areas	of	focus	for	the	de-
velopment	of	the	country	(See	Box	2	for	additional	in-
formation).	This	report	presents	the	key	findings	of	the	
SCD	conducted	on	Myanmar.	Apart	from	being	a	pub-
lic	good,	the	findings	of	the	SCD	will	be	used	as	inputs	
in	 the	 preparation	 of	 the	WBG’s	 engagement	 strategy	
in	Myanmar,	the	CPF.

Box 2: What is an SCD? 

The	SCD	is	an	analytical	report	prepared	by	World	Bank	
Group	Staff	under	the	Bank’s	new	country	engagement	
model.	The	objective	of	the	SCD	is	to	identify	the	most	
critical	 constraints	 and	 opportunities	 facing	 a	 coun-
try	 in	accelerating	progress	 toward	 the	goals	of	 ending	
extreme	 poverty	 and	 promoting	 shared	 prosperity	 in	 a	
sustainable	manner.	Thus,	 unlike	most	 other	WBG	 an-
alytical	reports,	the	SCD	has	a	sharper	focus	on	what	it	
will	take	for	a	country	to	end	poverty	and	boost	shared	
prosperity,	the	twin	goals	that	the	WBG	has	committed	
to	helping	its	member	countries	to	achieve.

The	WBG	 will	 use	 the	 SCD	 as	 an	 input	 towards	 the	
preparation	 of	 its	 Country	 Partnership	 Framework	
(CPF),	which	will	outline	a	framework	for	 the	Bank’s	
engagement	 and	 support	 in	 a	 country.	 The	 SCD	 is	
therefore	intended	to	become	a	reference	point	for	con-
sultations	with	the	Government	and	other	stakeholders	
on	 priorities	 for	 WBG	 country	 engagement.	 It	 is	 in-
tended	 to	 help	 the	 country,	 the	World	 Bank	 and	 oth-
er	 development	 partners	 establish	 a	 dialogue	 to	 focus	
their	efforts	around	goals	and	activities	that	have	high	
impact	and	are	aligned	with	the	global	goals	of	ending	
absolute	 poverty	 and	 boosting	 shared	 prosperity	 in	 a	
sustainable	manner.

Although	the	SCD	is	expected	to	help	inform	the	iden-
tification	of	areas	where	the	WBG	can	support	a	coun-
try	 and	 which	 will	 be	 outlined	 in	 the	 CPF,	 it	 will	 not	
be	limited	a	priori,	to	areas	or	sectors	where	the	WBG	
is	currently	active	or	where	the	WBG	expects	govern-
ment	demand.	The	SCD	simply	seeks	to	identify	areas	
that	will	have	the	biggest	impact	on	ending	poverty	in	
a	 country	 and	boosting	 shared	prosperity,	whether	 the	
WBG	will	be	involved	or	not.	By	not	limiting	the	scope	
of	the	analysis,	the	SCD	can	stimulate	an	open	and	for-
ward-looking	 dialogue	 between	 the	 WBG,	 member	
governments,	 and	 the	 broader	 public,	with	 a	 focus	 on	
what	is	important	for	the	country’s	development	agen-
da	rather	than	the	WBG’s	areas	of	engagement.	

The	 SCD	 is	 based	 on	 the	 best	 possible	 analysis,	
drawing	 on	 available	 evidence.	 It	 also	 identifies	 crit-
ical	 data	 and	 knowledge	 gaps	 that	 merit	 attention.	 It	
draws	 upon	 and	 synthesizes	 existing	 knowledge	 and	
evidence,	complemented	by	additional	analysis	as	nec-
essary,	including	consultations	with	various	stakehold-
ers.	 Knowledge	 products	 it	 could	 draw	 upon	 include	
those	 produced	 by	 the	 WBG	 (e.g.	 country,	 sectoral	
or	 thematic	 reports	 including	 poverty,	 equity,	 fragili-
ty,	 social,	 gender	 or	 investment	 climate	 assessments,	
country	 economic	 memorandums,	 public	 expenditure	
reviews,	 lending	 and	 Technical	Assistance	 programs,	
and	 others),	 the	 country	 government	 (e.g.	 national	 or	
sectoral	development	plans),	as	well	as	national	and	in-
ternational	 researchers,	 think	 tanks,	 the	 private	 sector	
or	other	development	partners,	as	relevant.

E. Conceptual framework for the Myanmar SCD

20. The guiding framework for the Myanmar SCD is 
as follows (See Figure 8): The	 starting	 point	 is	 de-
termining	the	profile	of	the	poor	in	Myanmar,	in	order	
to	understand	their	characteristics,	where	they	live,	and	
the	drivers	of	poverty.	The	second	aspect	of	the	frame-
work	 is	 the	 identification	 of	 key	 pathways	 for	 ending	
poverty	 and	 boosting	 shared	 prosperity.	 This	 entails	
identifying	activities	and	aspects	of	men	and	women’s	
livelihoods	 that	 have	 strong	 direct	 or	 indirect	 links	 to	
ending	absolute	poverty	and	boosting	shared	prosperi-
ty.	For	example,	the	ability	of	a	person	to	earn	income	
from	productive	economic	activities	(e.g.	farming,	mi-
cro-enterprises,	wage	employment)	is	an	example	of	a	
pathway	 to	 ending	 poverty.	Significant	 changes	 to	 the	
pathways	 can	 impact	 on	 a	 person’s	 chances	 of	 com-
ing	out	of	poverty	or	falling	into	it.	Therefore,	another	
key	 element	 of	 the	 diagnostic	 is	 to	 identify	 challeng-
es,	constraints,	and	 risks	 that	 lie	along	 these	pathways	
and	 therefore	 act	 as	 headwinds	 against	 efforts	 to	 end-
ing	 poverty	 as	 well	 as	 opportunities	 that	 need	 to	 be	
leveraged.	Gender	equality	along	with	cross	important	
cross-cutting	 issues	 such	 as	 governance	 and	 conflict	
will	 influence	 all	 the	 key	 diagnostics	 of	 pathways	 out	
of	poverty.	 	 	The	final	element	of	 the	diagnostic	 is	 the	
identification	 of	 priorities	 for	 removing	 the	 identified	
constraints	and	challenges.	

Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Ending Poverty and 
Boosting Shared Prosperity

World Bank report | 17

F. Sources of information, consultations, and quality of 
data

21. It is worth mentioning from the outset that the 
country suffers from significant information gaps 
that make a comprehensive and rigorous diag-
nostic difficult to undertake. The	 national	 accounts	
data	 are	 not	 reliable	 as	 are	 survey	 data	 because	 they	
are	based	on	an	old	sampling	frame	–	before	the	2014	
census	whose	preliminary	results	were	released	in	Au-
gust,	 the	 last	 was	 conducted	 in	 1983.	 This	 paucity	 of	
data	not	only	makes	it	difficult	for	government	and	the	
private	 sector	 to	make	decisions,	but	 also	 complicates	
efforts	 to	 carry	 out	 a	 comprehensive	 and	 rigorous	 di-
agnostic.	Box	 3	 provides	 an	 overview	 of	 the	 key	 data	
issues	in	Myanmar.	In	some	cases,	a	problem	might	be	
identified,	but	there	may	not	be	enough	information	to	
determine	 what	 needs	 to	 be	 done	 about	 it	 because	 of	
lack	 of	 key	 Myanmar	 specific	 data	 and	 information.	
Although	 the	preliminary	results	of	 the	census	show	a	
lower	total	population	figure	(51.4	million)	than	previ-
ously	estimated	by	the	Government	(60	million),	those	
socio-economic	 indicators	 used	 in	 the	SCD	 expressed	
in	per	capita	terms	are	not	affected.	This	is	because	the	
main	 source	of	 such	data	was	 the	WDI,	which	has	 al-
ready	been	using	a	population	estimate	broadly	consis-
tent	with	the	census	results.

Box 3: overview of key data issues in 
Myanmar

Myanmar’s	 statistical	 system	 is	 generally	 characteri- 
zed	 by	 poor	 quality	 data.	This	 is	 the	 result	 of	 limited	
capacity	 and	 funding	 over	 the	 years,	while	 the	 use	 of	
some	data	became	highly	politicized.	Since	taking	of-
fice,	 the	current	Government	 identified	 improving	 the	
quality	of	statistics	as	one	of	its	key	strategic	develop-
ment	goals.	 	Some	of	 the	key	data	 issues	 are	 summa-
rized	below.

Poverty: Two	 Integrated	 Household	 Living	 Condi-
tions	 Assessment	 (IHLCA)	 surveys	 were	 conducted,	
one	 in	 2005	 and	 one	 in	 2010.	 There	 are	 two	 weak-
nesses	inherent	in	these	surveys.		First,	given	that	until	
the	2014	population	census,	the	last	was	conducted	in	
1983,	the	sampling	frame	used	for	the	survey	may	not	
be	 representative	 of	 the	 population.	 	 Second,	 due	 to	
conflict,	 the	 survey	 did	 not	 cover	 some	 of	 the	 border	
areas.	These	weaknesses	have	called	into	question	the	
extent	 to	which	 the	 survey	 data	was	 representative	 of	
the	 country.	 	 Some	 of	 the	 results	 appear	 to	 be	 incon-
sistent	with	available	data	regarding	public	service	de-
livery	and	infrastructure.		It	is	hoped	that	the	results	of	
the	2014	population	census	will	provide	a	more	up	 to	
date	sampling	frame	for	the	next	full	round	of	IHLCA,	
currently	planned	for	2015.

National accounts: Historical	 data	 show	 high	 real	
growth	 rates	 that	 are	 inconsistent	with	 economic	 fun-

18 | World Bank report

damentals	and	available	data	from	key	sectors.		Public	
sector	activities	were	recorded	at	significantly	over-val-
ued	 exchange	 rates.	 	 Growth	 rates	 from	 recent	 years	
appear	 to	 be	 more	 realistic	 and	 consistent	 with	 other	
indicators	 but	 there	 remains	 considerable	 uncertainty	
about	the	actual	level	of	GDP.	The	IMF	Assessment	of	
Data	Adequacy	 for	 Surveillance	 observes	 several	 ad-
ditional	short-comings	but	also	notes	good	progress	in	
improving	the	quality	of	new	estimates.

Population: Until	 preliminary	 results	 from	 the	 most	
recent	 census,	 conducted	 in	 March/April	 2014	 were	
announced,	 there	 had	 been	 uncertainty	 around	Myan-
mar’s	population	figure,	with	numbers	ranging	from	48	
to	61	million,	with	an	estimated	3	million	people	living	
abroad.		Uncertainty	about	the	true	population	size	has	
created	doubts	about	estimates	of	GDP	per	capita.	The	
last	census	was	conducted	in	1983.

Trade: There	are	substantial	flows	of	jade	and	timber	
from	 the	 border	 areas	 which	 is	 difficult	 to	 capture	 in	
officially	produced	export	statistics.		Trade	data	are	re-
corded	at	the	time	of	entries	by	customs,	causing	seri-
ous	volatility	in	values	and	incorrect	time	records.		As	
in	many	countries,	data	recorded	by	the	authorities	and	
data	recorded	by	trading	partners	are	inconsistent.		Re-
cent	data	are,	however,	fairly	well	correlated	over	time.

Balance of payments: According	to	the	IMF	Assess-
ment	of	Data	Adequacy	for	Surveillance,	detailed	data	
on	services	transactions	and	financial	flows	are	gener-
ally	 not	 available	 and	 transactions	 that	 are	 not	 under-
taken	 through	 the	 official	 banking	 system	 are	 usually	
not	estimated.

External debt: Systems	for	recording	and	monitoring	
debt	exist	but	are	largely	manual.	Nonetheless,	records	
on	 external	debt	 and	debt	 service	payments	 in	 arrears	
are	comprehensive,	up	 to	date,	and	broadly	consistent	
with	 records	 from	 creditors.	 The	 good	 record	 keep-
ing	and	tracking	of	debt	and	arrears	was	critical	in	the	
speedy	resolution	of	arrears.	However,	a	key	weakness	
is	that	the	evaluation	of	external	obligations	which	are	
not	nominated	in	U.S.	dollars	is	conducted	irregularly.		
Historical	data	are	sometimes	distorted	by	applying	the	
exchange	rate	at	the	evaluation	point.

Consumer price statistics: Consumption basket 
weights	 represent	urban	households	only.	 	Some	 con-
struction	inputs	are	included;	rentals	of	owner	occupied	
housing	are	excluded;	missing	prices	are	not	imputed;	
and	the	classification	of	items	is	outdated.

Fiscal data: Myanmar’s	budget	classification	system,	
which	is	the	backbone	of	its	fiscal	accounts,	is	not	ful-
ly	consistent	with	modern	classification	structure	such	
as	 the	 Government	 Financial	 Statistics	 (GFS).	While	
fiscal	 data	 are	 broadly	 credible,	 no	 comprehensive	
monthly	 or	 quarterly	 compilation	 is	 done	 for	 sharing	
with	 external	 stakeholders.	 	 Annual	 comprehensive	
data	are	compiled	with	delays	of	up	to	12	months	after	

the	end	of	the	reference	year	although	this	is	not	unique	
to	 Myanmar.	 	 In	 addition,	 only	 consolidated	 data	 for	
state	 economic	 enterprises	 are	 available,	 and	 some	
transactions	are	recorded	partly	on	an	accrual	basis	and	
partly	on	 a	 cash	basis.	 	 It	 is	difficult	 to	know	 the	 true	
size	of	consolidated	government	because	the	full	array	
of	transactions	between	the	Union	government	and	its	
state	economic	enterprises	are	not	well	identified.		Fis-
cal	and	monetary	data	are	not	consistent.	The	recording	
of	government	debt	statistics	is	not	comprehensive.

Monetary and financial statistics. The	 monetary	
survey	compiled	by	 the	CBM	covers	 the	central	bank	
and	all	commercial	banks	(public	and	private).	Report-
ing	of	monetary	data	in	accord	with	IMF	classification	
principles	was	established	only	by	January	2012.		Pri-
or	data	may	have	problems	associated	with	 the	use	of	
the	 previously	 overvalued	 official	 exchange	 rate	 for	
valuing	 foreign	 currency-denominated	 balance	 sheet	
accounts.

Sector level data: Quality	 of	 data	 on	 key	 sectors	 in-
cluding	agriculture,	health,	and	education	varies,	but	is	
generally	 poor.	Administrative	 data	 are	more	 credible	
than	survey	data.	

Sources:  IMF Assessment of Data Adequacy for Sur-
veillance and World Bank staff assessments.

22. Taking into account the information gaps, the 
analyses in this SCD have been informed by data 
from various existing reports and surveys. First,	
the	 analyses	 have	 benefited	 from	 reviewing	 existing	
study	reports	on	Myanmar.	A	full	list	of	all	the	reports	
reviewed	 is	presented	 in	 the	bibliography.	Second,	 the	
SCD	 has	 also	 been	 informed	 by	more	 in-depth	 analy-
ses	of	household	level	data	from	the	2009/10	Integrated	
Household	Living	Conditions	Assessment	survey,	par-
ticularly	for	 the	poverty	diagnostic.	The	findings	 from	
the	analysis	of	the	IHLCA	have	been	complemented	by	
information	 from	 other	 surveys—albeit	 smaller	 scale	
or	 more	 narrowly	 focused	 in	 terms	 of	 geographic	 or	
thematic	coverage	than	the	IHLCA—as	well	as	a	num-
ber	of	qualitative	studies.	Third,	the	SCD	has	benefited	
from	the	Investment	Climate	Assessment	(ICA)	survey	
recently	conducted	by	the	World	Bank.

23. In addition, the SCD findings have also been in-
formed by extensive consultations with key stake-
holders in Myanmar. The	range	of	stakeholders	con-
sulted	 included	 Government	 officials	 both	 at	 central	
level	as	well	as	sub-national	 level,	members	of	parlia-
ment	 at	 central	 as	 well	 as	 sub-national	 level,	 the	 pri-
vate	 sector,	 civil	 society	 organizations,	 development	
partners,	academics,	think	tanks,	and	researchers.		The	
purpose	 of	 the	 consultations	 was	 to	 seek	 inputs	 from	
key	 external	 stakeholders	 on	 specific	 issues	 as	 part	 of	
the	 systematic	 and	 evidence-based	 identification	 of	
Myanmar’s	 key	 opportunities	 and	 challenges	 towards	
achieving	 the	 twin	 poverty	 goals,	 and	 subsequently,	

World Bank report | 19

in	 identifying	 the	 priorities	 for	 taking	 full	 advantage	
of	 these	 opportunities	 and	 removing	 the	 constraints.	
In	addition,	consultations	were	used	to	triangulate	and	
validate	some	information	collected	from	study	reports,	
fill	in	gaps,	as	well	as	obtain	further	insights	that	were	
useful	 in	 carrying	 out	 the	 diagnostic.	Table	A.2	 in	 the	
Annex	contains	a	 summary	of	 the	consultations	meet-
ings	 held,	 including	 some	 of	 the	 key	 focus	 areas	 that	
came	up	from	each	of	the	individual	meetings.	

Box 4: The Myanmar SCD consultations process

Preparation	of	the	Myanmar	SCD	benefited	significant-
ly	from	an	extensive	consultation	process.	The	consul-
tations	 were	 undertaken	 over	 a	 period	 of	 February	 to	
June	 2014.	 In	 total,	 15	 consultation	 events	 were	 held	
across	 the	 country	 in	 six	 locations:	Yangon,	 Nay	 Pyi	
Taw,	 Pathein,	Mandalay,	Taungyi,	 and	Hpa	An.	Apart	
from	 the	meetings,	 inputs	were	 also	 received	 through	
the	World	Bank’s	website	and	via	email	submissions.

Stakeholders	 consulted	 included	 central	 Government	
officials;	state	and	regional	Government	officials,	par-
liamentarians	 at	 central	 and	 state/regional	 level;	 civil	
society	representatives	including	from	NGOs,	INGOs,	
CBOs,	political	parties;	private	 sector	 representatives;	
researchers	and	think	tanks;	and	development	partners.	

Invitations	 and	 materials	 for	 consultations	 were	 sent	
out	at	least	two	weeks	in	advance	for	most	of	the	events,	
both	 in	English	 and	Myanmar	 language.	Consultation	
meetings	were	announced	on	the	World	Bank	website,	
Facebook	page,	and	local	newspapers.	Translation	was	
available	 at	 each	 event,	 and	 participants	 completed	
feedback	 forms	 to	 help	 improve	 the	 format	 of	 future	
consultation	events.	

   
II.  A PRoFILE oF
PoVERTY In MYAnMAR 

24.  The profile of poverty in Myanmar presented in 
this section is based mainly on analyses of data 
from the 2009/2010 IHLCA (IHLCA-2) survey, but 
draws on other information sources as well, both 
quantitative surveys and qualitative studies. 19 The	
IHLCA-2	covered	18,660	households	nationwide,	and	
was	 implemented	 in	 two	 rounds	 –	 December	 2009/
January	2010,	and	May	2010.20	The	IHLCA	is	compre-
hensive	 in	 its	 coverage	 of	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 household	
level	activities	and	outcomes.	It	thus	promises	a	fertile	
source	of	 information	on	 livelihoods	needed	 to	under-
stand	 the	 causes	 and	 dimensions	 of	 poverty	 in	Myan-
mar.	There	are	 two	weaknesses	 inherent	in	 the	survey.	
First,	because	the	last	population	census	was	conducted	
in	1983	and	hence	was	out-of-date,	the	sampling	frame	
used	 for	 IHLCA-2	 was	 based	 on	 administrative	 data	
of	unconfirmed	reliability.	Second,	due	 to	conflict,	 the	
survey	 did	 not	 cover	 some	 of	 the	 border	 areas.	These	
weaknesses	 have	 called	 into	 question	 the	 extent	 to	
which	 the	 IHLCA-2	 survey	 data	 are	 representative	 of	
the	country.	Nonetheless,	the	survey	is	the	only	source	
of	information	that	comes	close	to	providing	a	national- 
level	and	relatively	comprehensive	picture	of	 the	pov-
erty	 situation	 in	Myanmar.	And	 so	 the	approach	 taken	
here	 in	 constructing	 a	 poverty	 profile	 for	Myanmar	 is	
to	 carefully	 and	 selectively	 use	 analysis	 of	 data	 from	
the	 IHLCA,	 and	 combine	 this	 with	 insights	 gleaned	
from	 the	 numerous	 other	 studies	 and	 surveys	 that	 are	
smaller-scale	 or	 more	 narrowly	 focused--in	 terms	 of	
geographic	scope	or	thematic	coverage—but	provide	a	
more	granular	picture,	to	both	validate	and	flesh	out	the	
IHLCA-based	analysis.	With	the	successful	completion	
of	 the	 Population	 Census	 in	 March	 2014,	 and	 with	 a	
number	of	technical	assistance	and	surveys	planned	in	
the	next	three	years,	it	will	be	possible,	going	forward,	
to	 measurably	 improve	 the	 quality	 and	 depth	 of	 the	
household-level	information	available	in	Myanmar	for	
evidence-based	 policies	 and	 programs	 and	 to	 develop	
an	 up-to-date	 information	 base	 on	 poverty	 and	 living	
conditions	in	Myanmar.

A. The incidence of poverty and the extent of inequality

25. The analysis of the IHLCA-2 data (see UNDP 
(2011)), found a poverty rate of 25.6 percent in 
2009-2010, but more recent analysis of the same 
data, using a different methodology, suggests that 
the incidence of poverty may have been consider-
ably higher, at 37.5 percent. The	more	recent	analysis	
used	 the	same	cost-of-basic	needs	approach	as	earlier,	
and	 retained	 the	 same	 caloric	 threshold—2,300	 calo-

19 
 Information sources included, amongst others, the LIFT 
(Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund) surveys, the Multiple Indicators 
Cluster Survey (MICS) by UNICEF, and surveys carried out by the Border 
Consortium, as well as the Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring 
(QSEM) studies. 

20 
 The survey was implemented in two rounds so as to cover both 
the main harvest season and the main lean season in terms of agricul-
tural cultivation. In Myanmar, as in many other poor agrarian economies, 
consumption levels and household welfare can vary seasonally with the 
seasonality in incomes stemming from the agricultural cycle.

World Bank report | 21

ries	 per	 adult	 equivalent	 per	 day—to	 anchor	 the	 pov-
erty	 line.	 But,	 in	 keeping	 with	 the	 latest	 international	
practice,	the	re-estimation	used	a	more	comprehensive	
measure	of	consumption	expenditures,	which	included	
health	 costs	 and	 expenditures	 on	 durable	 goods.	 Fur-
ther,	 a	 new	 approach,	 also	 in	 line	 with	 international	
practice,	was	used	to	capture	and	adjust	for	the	cost	of	
living	differences	in	different	regions	of	the	country	in	
coming	up	with	the	poverty	lines.	

26.  A direct comparison of the incidence of poverty in 
Myanmar to that in other countries, using a 2005 
PPP $1.25-a-day line, is not possible because there 
are no reliable price survey-based estimates of the 
2005 PPP conversion factors for Myanmar. Myan-
mar	was	not	part	of	the	2005	round	of	globally	compa-
rable	 price	 surveys	 carried	 out	 under	 the	 International	
Comparison	 Project	 (ICP).21	 Myanmar	 did	 participate	
in	the	2011	ICP	round,	and	it	will	therefore	be	possible	
to	 include	Myanmar	 in	 the	 global	 poverty	monitoring	
system	 once	 the	 2011PPP-based	 poverty	 numbers	 are	
finalized.	

27. The new census and the resultant sampling frame 
will allow potential biases in the IHLCA-2 pover-
ty estimates to be revisited by “reweighting” the 
IHLCA-2 sample. As	indicated	in	Box	3	under	data	is-
sues	for	Myanmar,	the	IHLCA-2	survey	was	conducted 
using	 an	 outdated	 sampling	 frame,	 based	 on	 the	 1983	
census.	 	Therefore,	the	poverty	estimates	based	on	 the	
IHLCA-2	data	are	likely	to	have	some	bias.	However,	
it	 is	not	possible	 to	know	ex-ante,	which	direction	 the	
bias	is	likely	to	go.	

28. More importantly, the new census will provide an 
updated sampling frame for the planned MPLCS 
and potential IHLCA-3 that will help provide more 
up to date poverty numbers. Initially,	 a	 Myanmar	
Poverty	 and	Living	Conditions	 Survey	 (MPLCS)	will	
be	 conducted	 as	 a	 pilot	 small-scale	 (3,500)	 household	
survey	 to	 collect	 information	 on	 consumption	 and	 in-
come	levels	as	well	as	additional	key	welfare	and	other	
indicators	of	relevance	to	specific	sectors.	The	MPLCS	
will	aim	to	quickly	generate	up-to-date	and	credible	es-
timates	of	poverty,	and	to	inform	the	design	and	imple-
mentation	 of	 the	 large-scale	 (18,000	 households)	 na-
tional	 survey	 (IHLCA-3).	 The	 IHLCA-3	 will	 provide	
more	 comprehensive	 and	 updated	 poverty	 estimates.	
The	new	 census	will	 therefore	be	 critical	 in	providing	
an	up	to	date	sampling	frame	for	both	surveys.

29. Key socio-economic indicators also show a high 
incidence of non-income poverty. More	than	a	third	
of	 children	 under	 five	 years	 of	 age	 in	 Myanmar	 are	
reported	 to	 be	 stunted	while	 about	 23	 percent	 are	 un-
derweight.	 While	 these	 rates	 lower	 than	 in	 Laos	 and	
Cambodia,	 they	 are	 significantly	 higher	 than	 those	

21 
 There are some indirect estimates of the PPP conversion factor 
available but these are unlikely to be reliable given the highly distorted dual 
exchange rate system in place in Myanmar in 2005.

22 | World Bank report

prevailing	 in	 Vietnam,	 the	 Philippines,	 Thailand	 and	
China.	 Similarly,	 while	 the	 maternal	 mortality	 rate	 in	
Myanmar	(200	deaths	per	100,000	live	births)	is	lower	
than	in	Laos	and	Cambodia,	it	is	more	than	double	than	
that	in	the	Philippines	and	more	than	3	times	high	than	
in	Vietnam.	Housing	 indicators	also	 suggest	 that	 stan-
dards	 of	 living	 in	Myanmar	 lag	 behind	 in	 the	 region.	
Several	surveys	in	Myanmar	including	the	LIFT	base-
line	 survey	 and	 the	 IHLCA	 2	 indicate	 that	 only	 about	
half	of	 the	households	 in	Myanmar	 live	 in	houses	 that	
have	 durable	 roofing,	 compared	 to	 more	 than	 80	 per-
cent	 in	 neighboring	 countri	 Source: World Bank staff 

estimates from new analysis of 2009-2010 IHLCA survey 

data. es	such	as	Cambodia.	Myanmar’s	net	enrollment	
rate	 of	 47	 percent	 and	 gross	 of	 50	 percent,	 at	 the	 sec-
ondary	level	in	2010,	while	slightly	higher	than	that	for	
Laos,	 was	 significantly	 less	 than	 the	 regional	 average	
of	73	percent	for	East	Asia	and	the	Pacific	(UNESCO).		

30. Not unlike in many low income economies, a large 
fraction of Myanmar’s population was clustered 
around the poverty line, both above and below, 
in 2009-2010 (Figure 9). What	 this	 implies	 is	 that	
the	measured	 incidence	of	poverty	will	be	sensitive	 to	
slight	differences	in	where	the	poverty	line	is	set	(Fig-
ure	10).	 If,	 for	 instance,	a	2,100	calories	per	day	stan-
dard	were	used	to	anchor	the	poverty	line,	resulting	in	a	
poverty	line	that	is	10	percent	lower	in	monetary	terms,	
the	measured	poverty	would	be	28.3	percent,	nearly	10	
percentage	 points	 lower.	A	 10	 percent	 increase	 in	 the	
poverty	 line	 would,	 analogously,	 increase	 the	 poverty	
rate	 by	 nearly	 9	 percentage	 points.	 The	 clustering	 of	
households	 around	 the	 poverty	 line	 also	 implies	 that	
relatively	 small	 changes	 in	 circumstances—adverse	
shocks	or	increase	in	incomes—can	lead	to	significant	
movements	into	and	out	of	poverty.		

31. With a poverty rate of 37.5 percent, the poor and the 
bottom 40 percent are largely synonymous in Myan-
mar. Therefore,	for	all	practical	purposes,	as	of	2010,	the	
aim	 of	 enhancing	 shared	 prosperity	 coincided	with	 the	
goal	of	ending	absolute	poverty	in	Myanmar.	And	both	
entail	raising	the	incomes	of	the	poor,	and	ensuring	that	
they	continue	to	rise	as	the	economy	prospers.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

World Bank report | 23

the poor live and so geographic targeting of the 
poor needs to take account of both poverty rates 
and the share of the poor that live in an area. For	
instance,	using	2009-2010	population	and	poverty	data	
(subject	to	the	significant	data	quality	issues	set	out	in	
Box	 3),	 although	 the	 Dry	 Zone	 and	 the	 Delta	 have	 a	
lower	incidence	of	poverty	than	the	Coastal	zone	or	the	
Hills,	 because	 of	 the	 relatively	 high	 population	 share	
of	 the	Dry	Zone	 and	 the	Delta,	 they	 account	 for	near-
ly	 two-thirds	of	 the	poor	 in	Myanmar.	Conversely,	 al-
though	Chin	has	the	second	highest	poverty	rate	(71.5	
percent)	amongst	all	states	and	regions,	it	accounts	for	
only	1.4	percent	of	the	poor	due	to	its	small	population.	
Rakhine	 and	Ayeyarwaddy	 stand	out	 in	 that	 they	both	
have	high	poverty	rates	and	account	for	large	shares	of	
the	poor.	The	available	2009-2010	data	(subject	to	wide	
margins	 of	 error)	 indicate	 that	 Rakhine	 has	 a	 pover- 
ty	 rate	 of	 78	 percent	 and	 accounts	 for	 14.9	 percent	 of	
Myanmar’s	 poor,	 while	 Ayeyarwaddy,	 given	 its	 size	
and	 moderately	 high	 poverty	 rate	 (45.7	 percent),	 ac-
counts	 for	 18	 percent	 of	 the	 poor—the	 highest	 of	 any	
state	or	region.	Geographical	targeting	to	reduce	pover-
ty	must	take	account	of	both	the	rate	of	poverty	and	the	
population	share.

35. At 34 percent, the poverty rate for the Yangon re-
gion seems surprisingly high (Figure 14).  The	 33	
percent	poverty	rate	for	the	Mandalay	region	also	seems	
high,	particularly	in	light	of	the	important	commercial	
role	 that	 both	Yangon	 city	 and	Mandalay	 city	 play	 in	
Myanmar’s	 economy.	 These	 high	 rates	 of	 transition	
poverty	in	part	reflect	the	high	and	rising	cost	of	living	
in	urban	areas;	although	urban	areas	have	much	better	
local	 infrastructure	 and	 basic	 services,	 residents	 pay	 a	
lot	 to	 access	 these	 services.	 Limited	 access	 to	 stable,	
well-paid	 jobs	 is	 another	 contributing	 factor	 to	 urban	
poverty.	 	 In	 recent	 years,	Yangon	 has	 become	 a	mag-
net	for	rural	migrants	seeking	new	employment	oppor- 
tunities	 and	 a	 chance	 at	 a	 better	 life.	 	 But	 these	 new	
opportunities	 have	 been	 slow	 to	 develop.	 	According	
to	 the	 2009/10	 IHLCA2,	 the	 urban	 poor	 are	 typically	
employed	in	the	informal	sector,	or	as	casual,	unskilled	
workers	 in	 construction	 or	 other	 service	 sectors,	 and	
many	have	limited	education	and	job	skills.				

36. Although the rate of poverty is high in Yangon, 
the depth and severity of poverty is relatively low. 
Many	 poor	 households	 are	 clustered	near	 and	 just	 be-
low	 the	poverty	 line,	 and	promoting	good	growth	 and	
expanding	 economic	 opportunities	 could	 ensure	 they	
grow	out	of	poverty	very	quickly.	 	Managing	this	pro-
cess	 of	 transition--and	 related	 issues	 linked	 to	 rising	
expectations,	 rising	 inequality,	 and	 ensuring	 equitable	
access	to	public	assets	and	basic	services--is	an	import-
ant	poverty	challenge	for	Myanmar.		

32. Measured consumption inequality in Myanmar is 
relatively low in comparison with its regional neigh-
bors (Figure 11). The	initial	analysis	of	the	IHLCA-2	
(UNDP	 and	 GoM,	 2011)	 produced	 a	 Gini	 coefficient	
of	 0.20,	 which	 would	 have	 been	 remarkably	 low	 by	
global	 standards.	 The	 more	 recent	 re-examination	 of	
the	data,	which	are	still	subject	to	wide	margins	of	error	
(see	 Box	 3),	 yielded	 an	 estimated	 Gini	 coefficient	 of	
0.29,	higher	than	the	initial	estimate	but	still	relatively	
low.	 Inequality	 is	 higher,	 in	 some	 cases	 considerably	
higher,	 in	 all	 of	Myanmar’s	 regional	neighbors.	With-
in	Myanmar,	inequality	is	estimated	to	be	much	higher	
in	urban	areas	(0.36)	than	in	rural	areas	(0.25)	(Figure	
12).	Among	Myanmar’s	four	agro-ecological	zones,	in-
equality	 is	estimated	 to	be	highest	 in	 the	Delta	 (0.33),	
in	part	because	 the	 region	 includes	 the	city	of	Yangon	
(0.36)	but	likely	also	due	to	high	levels	of	inequality	in	
access	to	key	assets	like	agriculture	land.		

B. The spatial distribution of poverty 

33. The incidence of poverty varies substantially across 
the different geographic regions of Myanmar. In 
terms	of	agro-ecological	zones,	poverty	rates	are	high-
est	 in	 the	Coastal	zone	 (53.1	percent)	and	 lowest,	 sur-
prisingly	low,	in	the	Dry	Zone	(29.5	percent),	with	the	
Hills	(40.9	percent)	and	the	Delta	(40.4	percent)	falling	
in	 the	middle,	 close	 to	 the	 national	 rate	 (Figure	 13).22 
Poverty	rates	vary	as	well,	across	the	states	and	regions,	
in	 many	 cases	 even	 within	 the	 agro-ecological	 zones	
(Figure	 14).	 Rakhine	 (in	 the	 Coastal	 zone)	 and	 Chin	
(in	 the	 Hills),	 on	 the	 eastern	 border	 with	 Bangladesh,	
are	 by	 far	 the	 poorest	 states,	 with	 poverty	 rates	 of	 78	
percent	and	71.5	percent	respectively.	Ayeyarwaddy	(in	
the	Delta)	and	Shan	(in	the	Hills)	are	next	with	poverty	
rates	 in	 mid-40s.	 The	 incidence	 of	 poverty	 in	 the	 re-
gions	in	the	Dry	Zone	on	the	other	hand	are	uniformly	
lower	than	the	national	rate,	as	are	those	in	the	remain-
ing	hilly	border	states,	on	the	north	and	the	east,	adjoin-
ing	China	and	Thailand.	

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

34. The poorest areas—the areas with the highest in-
cidence of poverty—are not always where most of 

22 
 The mapping of states and regions into the four agro-ecologi-
cal zones is as follows: Hills (Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, Shan), Dry Zone 
(Bago, Magwe, Mandalay, Sagaing), Coastal (Rakine, Mon, Taninthayi), and 
Delta (Ayeyarwaddy, Yangon).

24 | World Bank report

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

C. Characteristics of the poor and the correlates and 
causes of poverty

37. Like the poor in most low-income economies, the 
poor in Myanmar live predominantly in rural ar-
eas, rely on agriculture and casual employment for 
their livelihood, have low levels of human capital 
and few physical and financial assets, lack reli-
able access to quality basic services, are exposed 
to a variety of shocks, and are poorly connected 
to markets because of inadequate infrastructure, 
imperfectly functioning markets, weak institutions 
and incomplete information. Many	of	 these	charac-
teristics	 are	 not	 unique	 to	 the	poor.	They	 are	 also	 true	
of	the	population	at	large	given	that	Myanmar	is	a	low- 
income	country	 that	has	yet	 to	undergo	a	fundamental	
structural	 transformation	 and	 is	 characterized	 by	 poor	
service	 delivery,	 weak	 institutions,	 low	 capacity,	 and	
under-developed	 markets.	 For	 instance,	 while	 76	 per-
cent	of	 the	poor	 live	 in	rural	areas,	so	does	74	percent	
of	 the	 population	 as	 a	 whole.	 Agriculture	 is	 the	 pri- 
mary	 source	 of	 livelihoods,	 not	 just	 for	 half	 the	 poor,	
but	also	for	nearly	half	of	all	households.	And	in	terms	
of	many	basic	services,	while	it	is	the	case	that	the	poor	
do	have	less	access,	in	some	cases	significantly	lower,	
the	numbers	are	still	very	low	for	the	non-poor	and	so	
the	 challenge	 of	 basic	 service	 delivery	 is	 one	 that	 ap-
plies	not	just	for	the	poor	(Figure	15).	

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

38. In terms of observable household characteristics 
that are most strongly correlated with a household 
being poor, three are worth noting—a household’s 
location, land ownership, and religious-ethno-lin-
guistic identity. The	 importance	 of	 location	 has	 al-
ready	been	highlighted	 in	 the	discussion	 above	on	 the	

spatial	distribution	of	poverty.	The	other	two	prominent	
correlates	of	poverty	in	Myanmar	are	discussed	below.	

39. Poverty in rural Myanmar is closely associated 
with landlessness or functional landlessness—cul-
tivation rights to less than 2 acres of cultivable 
land—particularly in the Delta, Coastal and Dry 
Zones. The	 rural	 landless	 and	marginal	 farmers	 (with	
cultivation	rights	to	less	than	2	acres	of	land)	constitute	
two-fifths	of	Myanmar’s	population,	but	make	up	over	
half	the	poor.	The	association	between	land	and	pover-
ty	 is	 particularly	 strong	 in	 the	Delta,	Coastal	 and	Dry	
zones	 (Figure	 16).	 In	 the	 Hills	 the	 correlation	 is	 less	
evident	 but	 that	 is	mostly	 because	 landlessness	 is	 less	
prevalent	and	shifting	cultivation	on	cleared	forest	land	
more	common,	as	well	as	the	fact	that	the	threshold	of	
2	 acres	 is	 less	 relevant	 in	 the	Hills,	where	 soil	quality	
is	poorer	and	 larger	 tracts	of	 land	are	needed	even	 for	
subsistence.

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

40. There is a strong correlation between poverty and 
ethno-linguistic identity (proxied in the 2009/10 
IHLCA by “mother tongue”), suggesting that 
social and political exclusion are a continuing 
challenge in Myanmar.  Native	 Myanmar	 speakers	
constitute	 over	 three-quarters	 of	 the	 population,	 but	
only	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 poor,	 implying	 that	 the	 risk	 of	
poverty	 is	much	higher	 for	non-Myanmar	groups	 as	 a	
whole.	But	there	is	considerable	variation	amongst	the	
non-Myanmar	ethno-linguistic	groups,	with	some,	like	
the	Mon,	Chinese	and	Arabic	speakers,	much	less	like-
ly	 to	 be	 poor,	 and	 others	much	more	 so.	 In	 particular,	
Chin	speakers	(1.2	percent	of	the	population),	Rakhine	
speakers	 (3.9	 percent	 of	 the	 population)	 and	 speakers	
of	“other	foreign	languages”	(3.1	percent	of	the	popula-
tion),	who	are	primarily	Muslim	minorities	identifying	
themselves	as	Rohingyas	living	in	Rakhine	are,	respec-
tively,	1.7,	1.8	and	2.4	times	more	likely	to	be	poor	than	
the	population	at	large.	

World Bank report | 25

future	 will	 therefore	 be	 important.	 Finally,	 other	 in-
dividual	 characteristics	 such	 as	 ethnicity	 and	 religion	
have	put	many	people	at	risk	of	being	poor.	

44. The main economy-wide shock households face 
are fluctuations in the prices of basic needs (in-
cluding food), as well as essential inputs and crops, 
with the latter being particularly important for 
agricultural households. Price	 fluctuations,	 whether	
they	 stem	 from	 exchange	 rate	 shocks,	 supply	 shocks,	
or	shocks	to	transport	and	logistic	costs,	matter	in	two	
ways.	Increases	in	food	prices	and	in	the	prices	of	other	
basic	commodities	and	services	make	 it	harder	for	 the	
working	poor	in	both	rural	and	urban	areas,	who	are	net	
“consumers”,	 to	 meet	 their	 basic	 needs.	 On	 the	 other	
hand,	 the	 main	 risks	 that	 farmers	 face	 are	 declines	 in	
the	prices	of	the	crops	they	produce	and	increases	in	the	
prices	of	essential	inputs.

E. A taxonomy of the poor and what it suggests about 
pathways out of poverty 

45. The poverty profile presented above suggests three 
main faces of poverty in Myanmar:  the “tradition-
al” poor, who are heavily concentrated in rural ar-
eas, have very low levels of education, depend on 
agriculture for their livelihood, have limited access 
to key productive assets and factors like land and 
finance; the “transitional” poor, many of whom 
live in urban and peri-urban areas, have transi-
tioned out of traditional rural livelihoods but still 
work as low-skill casual laborers; and the social-
ly-marginalized and “excluded” poor. The	“causes”	
of	 poverty	 for	 each	 of	 these	 groups	 are	 many—some	
that	 are	 common	 to	 all	 of	 them,	 as	 well	 as	 some	 that	
are	specific	to	each	group.	And	so	the	pathways	out	of	
poverty	 for	 each	 of	 these	 groups	 have	 some	 common	
elements	but	also	some	that	differ.

46. Investments in human capital and better access to 
quality basic services would be critical to ending 
the poverty of all three groups of the poor — both 
their income and non-income dimensions of pov-
erty. Better	 access	 to	 primary	 health	 care,	 water	 and	
sanitation,	 electricity,	 and	 basic	 education	 are	 import-
ant,	not	only	to	improve	well-being,	but	also	to	reduce	
vulnerability	 to	 poverty,	 enhance	 current	 income	 gen-
erating	 opportunities	 and	 lower	 the	 inter-generational	
perpetuation	of	poverty.

47. In order to end the poverty of the working poor, 
both “traditional” and “transitional”, would require 
increasing returns to their main asset—their labor. 
For	 the	 majority,	 the	 “traditional	 poor”,	 who	 current-
ly	 depend	 on	 agriculture	 for	 their	 livelihood,	 this	 will	
mean	both	raising	the	returns	to	agricultural	cultivation,	
while	in	parallel,	facilitating	their	movement	from	low-
er	 value-added	 agriculture-related	 activities	 to	 higher	
value-added	 activities	off	 the	 farm,	 by	 stimulating	 pri-
vate-sector	job	creation.		For	the	“transitional”	poor,	the	
opportunities	 for	 private-sector	 led	 off-farm	 employ-

Source: World Bank staff estimates from new analysis of 2009-
2010 IHLCA survey data.

D. Vulnerability to poverty

41. Data from the IHLCA survey and other sources in-
dicate that households in Myanmar are exposed to 
a wide variety of shocks and have limited means to 
manage them, resulting in significant vulnerability 
to falling into or further into poverty. The	 shocks	
households	are	exposed	 to	range	from	ones	 that	affect	
individual	 households	 to	 localized	 shocks	 limited	 to	
certain	areas,	to	those	that	are	economy-wide.		

42. Health-related shocks appear to be the main 
shocks that affect individual households. Illness or 
accidents	 requiring	 hospitalization	 or	 long-term	 med-
ical	 attention,	 have	 pushed	 households	 surviving	 just	
above	the	poverty	level	into	poverty,	while	the	poorest	
households	 are	 unable	 to	 cope	 financially,	 due	 to	 the	
combined	lack	of	social	protection	mechanisms	and	the	
burden	of	out-of-pocket	health	 expenditure.	Similarly,	
old and disabled persons are unable to participate in 
physical	and	productive	income	generating	activities.

43. Weather and climate-related shocks and conflict 
and communal violence are the main categories of 
localized area-specific shocks, with the former pri-
marily but not exclusively affecting households that 
depend on agriculture, and the latter, more preva-
lent in certain areas (e.g., border states) or relevant 
for certain ethno-linguistic groups. Crop loss due to 
pests	and	extreme	weather	events	such	as	droughts	and	
floods	are	a	significant	risk	for	agriculture	in	all	parts	of	
Myanmar.	This	has	introduced	a	new	dimension	of	vul-
nerability	in	rural	livelihoods.	Myanmar	is	also	highly	
vulnerable	 to	hydroclimatic	 extremes,	with	 significant	
exposure	to	cyclones,	and	a	quarter	of	the	country	faces	
periodic	flood	risk	(threatening	36	percent	of	the	coast-
al	 population).	 Conflict	 in	 the	 border	 areas	 has	 led	 to	
a	 population	 of	 internally	 displaced	 families	 who	 are	
at	 greater	 risk	 of	 poverty	 because	 they	 are	 unable	 to	
participate	in	normal	income	earning	activities	and	in-
vest	in	developing	the	human	capital	of	their	children.	
The	 size	 of	 this	 population	 remains	 unclear	 and	 it	 is	
almost	certainly	the	case	that	poverty	amongst	them	is	
under-estimated.	Understanding	the	poverty	challenges	
of	 the	 Internally	Displaced	 Persons	 (IDPs)	 and	 ethnic	
minorities	in	general	is	currently	not	feasible,	given	the	
limited	coverage	of	 the	previous	“national”	household	
survey	 (IHLCA-2).	Better	 data	 and	 deeper	 analysis	 in	

26 | World Bank report

ment	and	 income	generation	will	obviously	be	critical.	
The	 specifics	 of	 the	 interventions	 that	 will	 be	 needed	
are	discussed	in	greater	detail	in	later	sections.	But	they	
are	 likely	 to	 vary	 from	 region	 to	 region.	 For	 instance,	
securing	land	titles	and	improving	access	to	credit	may	
be	 essential	 for	 increasing	 plot-level	 yield-enhancing	
investments	 that	 are	 particularly	 important	 for	 raising	
agricultural	incomes	and	alleviating	rural	poverty	in	the	
Delta,	further	investment	in	irrigation	systems	and	water	
basin	management	may	be	the	most	relevant	for	the	Dry	
Zone,	 and	 investments	 in	 connectivity	 infrastructure	
may	be	the	most	critical	for	the	Hills.

48. Lastly, for the “excluded” poor—communities in 
remote conflict-affected areas, members of social-
ly-marginalized groups, families without anyone 
capable of productive work—a focus on increasing 
the returns to labor is unlikely to be sufficient. By	
definition,	these	groups	have	been	or	are	likely	to	be	ex-
cluded from or less connected to opportunities for pro-
ductive	economic	activity.	And	so	for	these	groups,	the	
pathways	out	of	poverty	will	likely	have	to	include	spe-
cific	targeted	interventions	and	programs	of	assistance.			

III. PAThWAYS oUT oF PoVERTY
AnD InTERVEnTIon AREAS

28 | World Bank report

49. This section seeks to identify the most efficient 
and effective pathways (strategies) for lifting the 
poor out of poverty, the critical pre-requisites, 
constraints to be addressed, and the intervention 
areas for removing the constraints. A	major	feature	
of	 the	SCD	 is	 that	 it	has	a	sharp	focus	on	 intervention	
areas	that	have	a	strong	direct	or	indirect	link	to	ending	
poverty	and	boosting	shared	prosperity.	Ultimately,	the	
aim	is	to	identify	priorities	for	accelerating	progress	to-
wards	the	twin	goals.	It	is	in	this	regard	that	given	the	
taxonomy	 of	 the	 poor	 in	 Myanmar	 and	 the	 country’s	
unique	 context	 presented	 in	 the	 previous	 section,	 key	
pathways	out	of	poverty	are	identified,	based	on	some	
over-arching	 principles.	 Once	 these	 pathways	 have	
been	 determined,	 intervention	 areas	 are	 identified	 for	
removing	critical	constraints	within	the	pathways.	

A. Strategic Framework for Inclusive and 
Sustainable growth

50. A growth strategy for Myanmar has to fit Myan-
mar’s circumstances. Myanmar	 is	 confronted	 by	
many	 of	 the	 same	 challenges	 seen	 in	most	 poor,	 rural	
and	 resource	 based	 economies.	 Yet,	 Myanmar	 is	 not	
typical.	 	 It	 has	 a	 potentially	 powerful	 advantage	 with	
its	large	internal	market	(about	the	same	as	the	Repub-
lic	 of	 Korea)	 surrounded	 on	 both	 sides	 by	 two	 of	 the	
world’s	largest	markets	in	China	and	India.		It	also	try-
ing	to	resolve	60	years	of	conflict	over	ethnic	and	reli-
gious	autonomy	and	deciding	how	best	to	complete	the	
transition	 away	 from	 the	 old,	 socialist-military	 model	
adhered	 to	 in	earlier	years.	 	Thus,	both	 the	framework	
for	growth	 through	structural	 transformation	and	open	
trade	 and	 investment,	 and	 the	 conflict,	 security	 and	
development	 framework	 set	 out	 in	 the	 World	 Bank	
Group’s	 World Development Report 2011 provide sa-
lient	 elements	 of	 a	 growth	 framework	 for	 Myanmar.	
Over	the	medium-term,	other	factors	will	also	gain	im-
portance,	such	as	diversification	through	imitation	and	
innovation.

51. Shifting labor from low productivity to high pro-
ductivity jobs, typically from agriculture to man-
ufacturing and services, will drive growth. Achiev-
ing	this	shift	will	involve	careful	sequencing	of	policy	
reforms	and	investment.		Several	initial	steps	have	been	
taken	 (see	 paragraph	 53	 below).	 	The	 prioritization	 in	
Section	 III.C	 identifies	 some	 key	 factors,	 such	 as:	 (i)	
removal of obstacles to private sector investment aris-
ing	from	instability,	poor	regulation	or	lack	of	finance;	
(ii)			screening	of	government	investments	to	encourage	
private	investors	without	crowding	them	out;	(iii)	quick	
and affordable transport of food from rural to urban 
areas; (iv) quick and affordable access to information 
about	 new	 job	 opportunities	 and	 removal	 of	 obstacles	
to	 labor	mobility;	 progress	 toward	 universal	 access	 to	
quality	 education	 and	 training	 to	 upgrade	 skills.	 The	
prospects	for	poverty	reduction	are	greater	when	newly	
released	 farm	 labor	 can	 find	 its	 way	 to	 good,	 formal	
sector	jobs	rather	than	those	in	the	informal	sector	with	
its	lower	wages,	lower	retirement	and	healthcare	bene- 

fits	and	higher	vulnerability	to	lay-offs	and	accidents.		

52. Myanmar’s location in Southeast Asia, large labor 
force, membership in ASEAN and excellent coast-
line suggest that joining the manufacturing sup-
ply chains centered in Asia can kickstart growth. 
Myanmar will likely be among the countries to 
gain the most from increased economic integration 
through ASEAN Economic Community. Exports	
make	it	possible	to	procure	a	larger	volume	and	wider	
variety	and	good	quality	capital	goods	not	available	lo-
cally.		Export	demand	can	also	help	drive	the	expansion	
of	manufacturing	and	 services	 jobs	 required	 for	 struc-
tural	transformation.		Policies	to	help	Myanmar	to	take	
full	 advantage	 of	 the	 gains	 from	 trade	 include	 those	
promoting	 access	 to	 financing,	 both	 domestically	 and	
from	 abroad,	 strong	 macroeconomic	 policies	 (includ-
ing	 real	 exchange	 rate	 level	 and	 stability),	 conducive	
tariff	and	 foreign	 investment	 regimes.	 	There	are	 risks	
for	Myanmar	too.	Opening	the	economy	to	more	trade	
almost	always	creates	some	losses	for	some	individuals	
and	 firms	 that	 cannot	 compete	 with	 external	 products	
and	 services.	 Growth	 and	 poverty	 reduction	 will	 be	
aided	by	policies	that	help	these	people	transition	to	in-
dustries	where	Myanmar	 has	 a	 competitive	 advantage	
and	to	provide	welfare	programs	for	those	who	cannot	
make	the	needed	transitions.	

B. The government’s reform program

53. The Government has launched and begun imple-
menting some key reforms. Initial reforms focused 
on	the	political	system	and	national	unity,	but	key	mac-
roeconomic	 reforms	 were	 put	 into	 play	 early	 as	 well.	
The	 severely	 over-valued	 official	 exchange	 rate	 was	
unified	under	a	managed	float	in	2012.		The	change	has	
been	beneficial	to	government	fiscal	operations	and	has	
put	 an	 end	 to	 the	 unfair	 advantage	 over	 private	 firms	
held	by	state	economic	enterprises	due	to	their	previous	
access	 to	 inexpensive	 foreign	 exchange.	 	 External	 ar-
rears	were	cleared	in	2013.		The	central	bank	has	been	
divested	from	the	Ministry	of	Finance	in	2013	with	in-
dependent	monetary	 authority.	Details	 have	 also	 been	
released	 on	 increasing	 transparency	 in	 the	 national	
budget.	New	laws	to	facilitate	foreign	direct	investment	
have	 been	 passed.	These	 changes	 have	 been	 followed	
by	 a	 large	 number	 of	 new	 laws	 for	 almost	 every	 sec-
tor	 in	 the	 economy	 –	many	 aimed	 at	 facilitating	more	
public	 and	 private	 investment	 in	 human	 and	 physical	
capital.	 	 However,	 most	 ministries	 have	 been	 unable	
to	 catch	 up	with	 the	 sheer	 speed	 and	 volume	 of	 these	
changes,	creating	implementation	backlogs	and	bottle-
necks.		At	the	same	time,	as	mentioned	in	Part	I	above,	
conflict	continues	in	several	parts	of	the	country.		These	
challenges	 leave	 private	 investors	 with	 uncertainty,	
divert	 government	 resources	 and	 attention	 from	 more	
productive	 uses,	 and	 jeopardize	 the	 sustainability	 of	
reforms.

World Bank report | 29

possible	because	there	is	not	enough	data	and	analytical	
base	to	support	it.

58. Growth can be a powerful driver of poverty reduc-
tion. For	Myanmar,	 returns	 in	 agriculture	 and	 outside	
agriculture	 have	 been	 low	 due	 to	 low	 productivity.	 In	
addition,	the	country	has	not	been	able	to	create	enough	
jobs	 due	 to	 limited	 participation	 of	 the	 domestic	 and	
foreign	 private	 sector	 in	 the	 economy,	 and	 because	 of	
isolation	from	the	global	economy,	while	sustainability	
has	 been	 at	 risk	 because	 of	 a	 fragmented	 approach	 to	
Myanmar’s	 key	 natural	 resource	 –	 the	 Ayeyarwaddy	
river	 basin.	 	 Therefore,	 a	 key	 over-arching	 principle	
is	 ensuring	 greater	 openness	 and	 participation	 of	 the	
domestic	 and	 foreign	 private	 sector	 in	 the	 economy	
(particularly	 in	 the	 non-gas	 sectors	 which	 have	 great-
er	 potential	 for	 job	 creation),	 fostering	 integration	
with	 the	 global	 economy,	 enhancing	 productivity,	 and	
adopting	 an	 integrated	 approach	 to	 the	 management	
of	 the	 Ayeyarwaddy	 river	 basin.	 Ultimately,	 this	 is	
about	growing	the	economy	in	order	to	increase	the	pie	
and	 ensuring	 sustainability.	 Over	 a	 3-5	 year	 horizon,		
growth	 will	 come	 from	 increasing	 investment,contin-
ued	growth	in	natural	resource	exports,	and	increasing	
productivity.	These	 considerations	 lead	 to	 the	 identifi-
cation	of	the	first	key	pathway	out	of	poverty	in	Myan-
mar:	 promoting openness and sustainable private- 
sector led growth for more jobs. 

59. All three groups of poor, including the socially mar-
ginalized, will need to have access to basic services 
and infrastructure networks to reduce non-income 
poverty and become empowered to participate 
in income earning opportunities – whether in the 
form of wage or self-employment. Access to criti-
cal	services	will	also	help	break	the	inter-generational- 
cycle	of	poverty.		However,	as	mentioned	in	the	previ-
ous	sections,	access	to	these	services,	especially	in	the	
rural	and	remote	areas,	has	been	limited	due	to	Myan-
mar’s	past	political	and	economic	history.	Therefore,	a 
second	 key	 over-arching	 principle	 for	 ending	 poverty	
in	 Myanmar	 is	 universal	 access	 and	 empowerment.	
While	fighting	poverty	via	the	first	route	above	is	more	
about	fostering	growth,	this	second	route	is	more	about	
making	 such	 growth	 inclusive.	This	 leads	 to	 the	 iden-
tification	 of	 a	 second	 key	 pathway	 out	 of	 poverty	 in	
Myanmar:	 promoting universal access to critical ser-
vices and empowerment for inclusive growth, particu-
larly in rural areas.

C. Critical next steps

1. Considerations in identifying priority intervention 
areas and sequencing 

54. Within each pathway, it is important to identify 
priority intervention areas and how action could 
best be sequenced over time. Given	Myanmar’s	cur-
rent	 high	 poverty	 rate	 and	 low	 level	 of	 development	
more	generally,	progress	will	need	to	be	made	in	many	
areas	 for	 the	 country	 to	 accelerate	 progress	 towards	
ending	 poverty	 and	 boosting	 shared	 prosperity.	At	 the	
same	time,	it	is	recognized	that	there	are	financial,	hu-
man,	 and	 institutional	 capacity	 constraints	 both	 in	 the	
public	 and	 private	 sectors	 to	 adequately	 deal	 with	 all	
the	constraints	concurrently,	hence	the	need	for	prioriti-
zation	and	proper	sequencing.	

55. The main basis for identifying priorities is the like-
ly magnitude of impact on reducing poverty of ac-
tion on an intervention area. In	 turn,	magnitude	 of	
impact	 depends	 on	 many	 factors.	A	 key	 factor	 is	 the	
current	 severity	 of	 the	 problem.	 	 If	 Myanmar	 faces	 a	
wide	 deficiency	 gap	 in	 a	 particular	 intervention	 area	
then	 action	 is	 likely	 to	have	 a	high	 impact	on	poverty	
reduction.	Similarly,	 if	an	 intervention	area	has	 strong	
linkages	 or	 complementarities	 with	 other	 intervention	
areas	 then	 action	 would	 also	 have	 a	 high	 impact	 on	
poverty	reduction.	

56. Sequencing of intervention areas needs to take into 
account several considerations. In	 particular,	 time	
preference	 need	 to	 be	 first	 given	 to	 those	 high	 impact	
intervention	 areas	 whose	 actions	 can	 easily	 be	 imple-
mented,	where	available	evidence	 is	 strong	on	 the	na-
ture	 and	 scale	 of	 the	 problem	 to	 be	 solved	 and	 what	
exactly	needs	to	be	done,	and	where	the	impact	on	pov-
erty	 reduction	can	be	 realized	sooner	 rather	 than	 later.	
However,	 the	need	 to	have	 a	 long-term	perspective	of	
development	may	 require	 that	 some	 action	 starts	 now	
even	if	not	meeting	the	above	criteria.	For	instance,	al-
though	impact	of	action	in	an	area	may	only	be	evident	
in	the	medium	to	long-term,	it	may	be	advisable	to	start	
implementing	some	actions	in	the	short-term	since	de-
laying	action	would	only	prolong	the	problem	further.		

2.	 Identified	areas	of	intervention	

57. The analysis below identifies two pathways encom-
passing 12 priorities, along with four prerequisites 
that need urgent attention. The	first	pathway	focus-
es	on	 increasing	agricultural	productivity	and	creating	
more	 lucrative	 job	 opportunities.	 	 	 	 The	 second	 path-
way	focuses	on	universal	access	and	empowerment	for	
inclusive	 growth,	 particularly	 in	 rural	 areas.	 	 Finally,	
there	 are	 four	 prerequisites	 that,	 if	 left	 unaddressed,	
will	either	diminish	Myanmar’s	success	 in	poverty	re-
duction	 or	 risk	 the	 sustainability	 of	 the	 reform	 effort.		
Figure	15	provides	a	broad	picture	of	how	 the	various	
interventions	can	be	prioritized	and	 sequenced.	A	pre-
cise	rank-order	of	relative	priorities	in	Myanmar	is	not	

30 | World Bank report

Figure 18: Pre-requisites, Pathways, and Key Interven-
tion Areas for Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosper-
ity 

take	full	advantage	of	these	opportunities.		

(a).	Facilitating	the	political	transition	

62. Uncertainty around the key elements of the politi-
cal transition poses a major challenge to efforts for 
creating jobs, increasing returns, and increasing 
access to services. In	particular,	 internal	and	external	
actors	 are	 unable	 to	 take	 long-term	 decisions	 on	 their	
investments	 and	 livelihoods.	 Key	 to	 facilitating	 the	
political	 transition	 will	 be	 attaining	 lasting	 peace	 and	
moving	out	of	 fragility	and	consolidating	 trust	and	 le-
gitimacy	between	the	state	and	its	people.

(i).	 Attaining	lasting	peace	and	moving	out	of	fragility

63. Comparative research across countries affected by 
conflict has demonstrated the negative impact of 
conflict on economic growth and poverty. Histori-
cally,	for	every	three	years	a	country	is	affected	by	ma-
jor	violence	or	 conflict,	poverty	 reduction	 lags	behind	
by	2.7	percentage	points,	with	the	average	cost	of	civil	
war	 equivalent	 to	more	 than	 30	 years	 of	GDP	 growth	
for	a	medium-sized	developing	country.23	 	Poverty	 re-
duction	 rates	 in	 countries	 affected	 by	 violence	 are	 on	
average	one	percentage	point	per	year	lower	than	those	
of	peaceful	countries,	dramatically	altering	the	trajecto-
ry	of	a	country’s	development	course.	

64. In Myanmar, 60 years of conflict have created ar-
eas facing extreme poverty. Poverty	 is	most	heavily	
concentrated	 in	 conflict-affected	 areas:	 poverty	 rates	
in	 Chin	 State	 stand	 at	 71	 percent	 and,	 in	 Rakhine	 at	
78	percent,	compared	 to	37.5	percent	nationally,24 and 
populations	 in	 these	 areas	 have	 some	 of	 the	 lowest	
human	 development	 indicators	 in	 Myanmar,	 with	 58	
percent	of	children	under	five	stunted	(UNICEF	MICS	
2010).	 Moreover,	 the	 long	 legacy	 of	 conflict	 in	 these 
areas	 not	 only	 increases	 absolute	 poverty,	 but	 also	
makes	 it	 more	 difficult	 to	 address	 other	 issues, 
including	 displacement,	 land,	 and	 opium	 cultivation	
(Myanmar	 remained	 the	 second	 largest	 opium	 poppy	
grower	 in	 the	world	 after	Afghanistan	 in	 2013	 and	 its	
production	 is	 almost	 exclusively	 concentrated	 in	 con-
flict-affected	 areas	 in	 Shan	 and	 Kachin	 State)	 (UNO-
DC	Opium	Survey	2013)	–	all	of	which	complicate	the	
context	for	development	interventions. A	fragile	peace	
process	 negatively	 affects	 Myanmar’s	 investment	 cli-
mate	and	also	negatively	impacts	on	the	Government’s	
ability	 to	 deliver	 critical	 basic	 services	 particularly	 in	
the	border	areas.

65. The Government is pursuing efforts to bring an 
end to the multiple conflicts in ethnic areas. Talks 
between	Government	and	ethnic	armed	groups	to	bring	
about	a	national	ceasefire	ahead	of	a	political	dialogue	
are	 continuing,	with	 the	Government	 signaling	 a	will-
ingness	 to	 consider	 decentralization	 and	 devolution	

23 

24 

 2011 WDR

 World Bank staff estimates from 2009-2010 IHLCA survey.

60. To accelerate progress towards the twin goals 
through the above main pathways, some pre-requi-
sites need to be in place. These	pre-requisites	serve	to	
lay	 the	 critical	 foundations	 for	 growth,	 inclusiveness,	
and	 sustainability.	 The	 pre-requisites	 define	 the	 over-
all	 political,	 governance,	 and	 macroeconomic	 envi-
ronment	 of	 Myanmar	 within	 which	 job	 opportunities	
are	created,	people	are	empowered	 to	 take	 full	advan-
tage	of	these	opportunities,	and	goods	and	services	are	
supplied	 and	delivered.	They	 also	define	 the	 technical	
capacity	 of	 the	 public	 sector	 to	 unleash	 the	 country’s	
potential	and	sustain	progress.	Progress	in	the	pre-req-
uisites	affects	the	speed	(efficiency),	effectiveness,	and	
sustainability	of	the	main	pathways	identified	above	in	
lifting	the	poor	out	of	poverty.	

3.	 Rationale	for	interventions	

1. Pre-requisites for inclusive and sustainable growth

61. Facilitating the political transition, enhancing so-
cial inclusion, maintaining macroeconomic stabil-
ity, and strengthening public sector capacity and 
governance will be critical pre-requisites for the 
fight against poverty. Action	in	these	areas	is	needed	
in	the	short	term	but	they	also	require	continued	atten-
tion.	 Without	 addressing	 the	 constraints	 identified	 in	
these	areas,	it	will	be	difficult	to	make	and	sustain	prog-
ress	 in	 creating	 job	 opportunities,	 increasing	 returns,	
promoting	universal	access,	and	empowering	people	to	

to	 accommodate	 some	 of	 the	 long-standing	 griev-
ances	 voiced	 by	 ethnic	 armed	 groups.	 	 Following	 the	
signing	 or	 renewal	 of	 a	 series	 of	 ceasefires	 (including	
with	 the	 Karen	 National	 Union,	 bringing	 to	 an	 end	
Myanmar	 –	 and	 the	 world’s	 –	 longest-running	 armed	
conflict),	 a	 series	 of	 leadership	 meetings	 between	 the	
Government	and	 the	groups	starting	 in	 late	2013	have	
made	progress	and	built	trust.		This	process	has	includ-
ed	the	Kachin	Independence	Organization	(KIO),	even	
though	 conflict	 continues	 between	 Government	 and	
KIO	forces.		The	renewed	conflicts	in	early	2014,	with	
armed	 clashes	 in	 both	 Kachin	 and	 parts	 of	 northern	
Shan	State	that	displaced	over	5,000	people,	underlined	
the	 continued	 fragility	 of	 this	 process	 and	 the	 impor-
tance	of	a	 successful	 resolution	 to	establish	peace	and	
security	across	the	country.

66. While peacemaking in the Myanmar context has 
long been focused on the armed conflicts with eth-
nic minority groups, the recent opening of political 
space has brought to the fore other potential fault 
lines and areas of conflict. This	most	notably	includes	
recurrent	 incidents	 of	 religious	 violence	 over	 the	 past	
two	 years,	 where	 finding	 sustainable	 solutions	 is	 im-
portant	not	only	 to	address	violent	conflict	and	citizen	
security,	but	also	to	address	broader	issues	of	social	in-
clusion.

67. Establishing peace and security across Myanmar 
will involve finding a sustainable solution to the 
issue of the Muslim minority that identifies as Ro-
hingya in Rakhine State. As	 mentioned	 in	 the	 pre-
vious	 section,	 this	Muslim	minority	 is	 not	 recognized	
as	an	ethnic	group	by	the	Government,	but	rather	seen	
as	illegal	migrants	from	neighboring	Bangladesh.		Fol-
lowing	outbreaks	of	violence	directed	against	 this	mi-
nority	in	the	summer	of	2012	that	killed	89	people	and	
displaced	 over	 140,000,	 the	 Government	 established	
temporary	camps	where	most	of	the	displaced	continue	
to	live	today.25	Subsequent	violence	took	place	against	
Muslim	minorities	in	Rakhine	in	2013	and	2014,	which	
spilled	over	 into	broader	anti-Muslim	violence	 in	oth-
er	parts	of	Myanmar,	including	in	the	country’s	second	
largest	city	Mandalay	in	2014.26

68. General elections are scheduled for end 2015. As 
is	 common	 in	many	 countries,	 there	 is	 a	 potential	 for	
a	polarization	of	politics	(and	a	politicization	of	devel-
opment	 decisions)	 ahead	 of	 the	 elections,	 and	 a	 peri-
od	 of	 uncertainty	 will	 likely	 follow	 the	 elections	 as	 a	
new	 government	 takes	 office	 and	 establishes	 its	 poli-
cy	 priorities.	 	Complicating	 this	 situation	 are	 ongoing	
campaigns	to	change	the	constitution,	including	around	
the	 eligibility	 for	 high	 office	 of	 the	 opposition	 leader.
Beyond	uncertainty,	this	situation	could	create	domes-

25 
 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human 
Rights in Myanmar, UNOHCHR, August 2012 and September 2014.

26 
 International Crisis Group, Myanmar Crisis Watch, April 2014.< 
http://www.crisisgroup.org/en/publication-type/crisiswatch/crisiswatch-da-
tabase.aspx?CountryIDs=%7b7E12FB4D-6C23-449D-AF08-550AD5FD-
2F2E%7d#results>

World Bank report | 31

tic	political	 tensions	and	 instability,	and	depending	on	
its	 resolution	 impact	 investment	 and	 aid	 flows	 to	 the	
country.		

(ii).	 Consolidating	trust	and	legitimacy	between	the	state	and	
its	people

69. A long history of poor governance and corruption 
eroded the trust of individuals and firms in the 
State preventing them from responding positively 
to opportunities or participating fully in Govern-
ment-led development initiatives and programs. 
Before	the	transition,	the	governance	environment	was	
very	 poor,	 with	 people	 rarely	 playing	 by	 the	 rules.	 In	
particular,	 the	 system	 was	 characterized	 by	 high	 cor-
ruption,	 cronyism,	 social	 discrimination,	 and	 poor	
public	 services.	 Therefore,	 although	 the	 Government	
is	 taking	 steps	 to	 create	 a	 conducive	 environment	 for	
doing	business,	there	is	a	perception,	based	on	past	ex-
perience,	that	public	procurement	has	not	been	fair	and	
the	 private	 sector	 has	 not	 been	 able	 to	 compete	 on	 a	
level	 playing	 field	 with	 public	 sector	 or	 public	 linked	
entities.	 Similarly,	 unresolved	 issues	 about	 ethnic	 au-
tonomy	 as	well	 as	 a	 flawed	 election	 process	 have	 un-
dermined	the	state’s	legitimacy	amongst	certain	groups	
of	people	and	geographical	areas.	In	turn,	this	has	ham-
pered	 the	Government’s	 efforts	 to	 operate	 and	 deliver	
services	in	such	areas.	

70. The constitutional reform and upcoming elections, 
offer huge opportunities for gaining people’s trust 
and achieving state legitimacy. Under	 democratic	
governance,	 it	 has	 become	 necessary	 for	 the	 Govern-
ment to become more transparent and accountable to 
its	citizens,	which	 is	critical	 to	building	 trust.	Govern-
ment	 now	 has	 an	 opportunity	 to	 be	 more	 transparent	
in	various	areas	of	political	and	economic	governance,	
including	procurement,	as	has	been	demonstrated	in	the	
award	 of	mobile	 phone	 licenses,	 a	 tender	 process	 that	
won	widespread	 praise	 for	 its	 transparency	 and	 integ-
rity.	 Similarly,	 the	 on-going	 constitutional	 reform	 and	
upcoming	 elections	 offer	 an	 opportunity	 for	 Govern-
ment	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 concerns	 of	 ethnic	 minorities	
are	 addressed,	 including	 through	 further	 decentraliza-
tion.		

71. A key challenge and risk to consolidating trust and 
state legitimacy lies in the weak capacity of the po-
lice and judiciary, and likelihood of vested inter-
ests frustrating reforms. There	 have	 been	 concerns	
about	the	capacity	of	the	police	and	judiciary	to	ensure	
that	the	rule	of	law	is	enforced	and	upheld.	As	a	legacy	
of	the	past,	there	is	still	skepticism	about	the	ability	of	
the	 police	 and	 the	 judiciary	 to	 act	with	 independence,	
such	 as	when	 it	 comes	 to	 punishing	 corrupt	 practices.	
Further,	 those	who	 have	 benefited	 from	 the	 system	 in	
the	past,	both	within	Government	and	outside,	may	not	
be	happy	with	reforms	that	open	up	the	space	to	com-
petition,	 equity,	 transparency,	 and	 accountability,	 and	
may	therefore	try	to	frustrate	reform	efforts.	

32 | World Bank report

(b).	Enhancing	social	inclusion

72. There are patterns of social exclusion in Myan-
mar which pose obstacles to groups seeking to lift 
themselves out of poverty, gain equitable access 
to services and share in prosperity.  Certain social 
groups	 face	 barriers,	 by	 virtue	 of	 their	 identity	 or	 lo-
cation,	 to	 participating	 fully	 in	 society	 and	 sharing	 in	
prosperity.	The	main	drivers	are	religion,	ethnicity	and	
citizenship,	gender,	geography,	and	conflict.	There	has	
been	 long-standing	 discrimination	 and	 marginaliza-
tion	 of	 non-Buddhists,	 dating	 back	 to	 colonial	 times	
but	 which	 has	 most	 recently	 been	 directed	 particular-
ly	 at	 Muslims,	 but	 also	 historically	 at	 Christians	 and	
other	 groups.	 	 For	 example,	 in	 Rakhine	 State,	 people	
belonging	 to	 the	 Muslim	 minority	 that	 self-identifies	
as	 Rohingya	 are	 stateless,	 poor,	 and	 face	 systematic	
discrimination,	 including	 restrictions	 on	 family	 size,	
marriage,	 birth	 registration,	 and	 movement.	 This	 se-
verely	 constrains	 livelihood	 opportunities	 and	 access	
to	markets	and	basic	services,	and	prevents	integration.	
Elsewhere,	anti-Muslim	sentiment	has	grown	since	the	
reforms	 began,	 and	 since	 2012	 has	 spilled	 over	 into	
violence	 outside	 Rakhine	 State,	 specifically	 Meiktila.		
Burmese	 people	 of	 Chinese	 or	 Indian	 descent	 are	 not	
recognized	as	an	official	ethnic	group.		An	NRC,	which	
is	a	‘citizenship	scrutiny	card,	is	needed	to	access	high-
er	education,	register	a	business,	buy	land,	stand	for	of-
fice,	move	past	checkpoints,	migrate	 internally,	and	 to	
get	jobs	outside	the	informal	sector.

73. The challenge of dealing with social exclusion came 
to the fore in Rakhine during Myanmar’s census 
carried out in April 2014.  The	majority	Buddhist	Ra-
khine	residents	were	concerned	about	the	intent	of	the	
census	 to	allow	enumeration	and	self-identification	by	
the	Muslim	minority	residents	that	identify	themselves	
as	Rohinghya	 and	 led	 a	boycott	of	 the	 census	 that	 led	
to	mass	demonstrations.		In	the	face	of	demonstrations	
and	 threats	 of	 violence	 against	 government	 officials	
and	 international	aid	workers,	enumeration	 in	 the	area	
with	 mostly	 Muslim	 minority	 residents	 was	 halted.		
Elsewhere,	 the	 census,	 which	 was	 the	 country’s	 first	
since	1983,	was	considered	successful.	

74. Women’s participation in decision making and ac-
cess to resources has been limited. The	 proportion	
of	women	in	national	parliament	is	only	at	6	percent	in	
2013,	starkly	lower	than	the	low	income	countries	aver-
age	of	19	percent.	A	recent	study	found	that	ideas	about	
leadership	are	set	in	the	home,	where	men	are	common-
ly	considered	the	household	head.		These	ideas	are	then	
reinforced	in	public	and	religious	life,	where	men	domi- 
nate	positions	of	power.27	 In	 addition,	 customary	 laws	
of	some	ethnic	populations	have	discriminated	women	
from	land	ownership	and	property	inheritance.28 

27 

 Action Aid, Care, Oxfam (2011)

75. The on-going reforms provide an opportunity for 
the Government to promote social inclusion in de-
velopment. This	is	because	it	offers	a	platform	for	ev-
idence-based	 policy	 making	 and	 bottom-up	 approach	
to	development.	Therefore,	there	is	now	an	opportuni-
ty	 for	 the	 government	 to	 ‘do	 development	 better’	 by	
ensuring	 that	 future	 development	 programs	 and	 poli-
cies are more consultative; include social assessment 
and	social	accountability	measures;	and	benefit	a	wide	
cross-section	 of	 society,	 particularly	 in	 ethnic	minori-
ty	areas.		The	World	Bank’s	Social	Impact	Monitoring	
(SIM)	 and	Qualitative	 Social	 and	 Economic	Monitor-
ing	(QSEM)	qualitative	social	research	programs	have	
documented	 the	 strength	 of	 social	 capital	 and	 collec-
tive	action	at	village	level,	at	least	within	homogenous	
groups.	

(c).	 Maintaining	macroeconomic	stability

76. Ensuring macroeconomic stability is important be-
cause it offers a more predictable environment in 
which businesses can plan and operate. Most funda-
mentally,	there	is	solid	empirical	evidence	that	econom-
ic	 uncertainty	 reduces	 private	 investment.	 Excessive	
fluctuations	 in	 prices,	 interest	 rates,	 exchange	 rates,	
wages	and	output	can	all	cause	harm.		Macroeconomic	
stability	requires	effective	monetary	management.	It	is	
therefore	 important	 to	 establish	 early	 adequate	 capac-
ity	 in	monetary	 and	fiscal	 institutions.	 	This,	by	 itself,	
is	not	enough	 in	 fragile	states.	 	Conflict	can	be	source	
of	price	instability	when	governments	find	they	can	fi-
nance	conflict	related	spending	and	other	activities	only	
through	excessive	money	creation.29	 	In	the	1990s	and	
2000s,	inflation	rates	were	quite	high	in	Myanmar,	as	a	
result	of	heavy	monetary	financing	of	the	large	budget	
deficits	 that	 resulted	 from	 pursuing	 development	 con-
currently	with	the	prosecution	of	multiple	conflicts.	

77. Although macroeconomic performance has genera- 
lly been strong in Myanmar, there is weak institu-
tional capacity for macroeconomic management.
Fiscal	policy	has	largely	been	the	main	macroeconom-
ic	stabilization	tool,	but	with	the	CBM	playing	the	role	
of	treasury	and	no	department	in	the	MOF	dedicated	to	
fiscal	 strategy	 and	 policy.	The	CBM	 relies	 heavily	 on	
direct	monetary	policy	instruments,	mainly	in	the	form	
of	 reserve	 requirements	 and	 prudential	 limits	 on	 the	
structure	 of	 commercial	 bank	 balance	 sheets.	 Interest	
rates	have	been	administratively	set	for	all	instruments	
and	 maturities,	 and,	 until	 recently,	 rarely	 changed.	
There	 is	 no	 formal	 interbank	 market	 and	 pervasive	
controls	 on	 banks	 impede	 the	 monetary	 transmission	
mechanism.	 In	 the	 past,	 a	 fixed,	multiple,	 and	 restric-
tive	exchange	rate	policy	has	had	damaging	effects	on	
the	economy	while	deficit	monetization	has	 fueled	 in-
flationary	pressures.

78. Myanmar’s macroeconomic situation has im-
proved significantly in recent years (See Table 4). 

28 
 Committee on the Elimination of  Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW) Report (2007).

29 

 Elbadawi and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2007.

World Bank report | 33

ipated	 foreign	 exchange	 inflows	 not	materialize	 soon.	
Risks	also	arise	from	rapid	growth	of	the	financial	sec-
tor,	 particularly	 given	 the	 lack	 of	 reliable	 data	 on	 the	
quality	 of	 bank’s	 balance	 sheets,	 and	 still	 nascent	 su-
pervisory	capacity.	Finally,	as	mentioned	earlier,	a	stall-
ing	 of	 the	 political	 transition	would	 have	 a	 significant	
negative	 impact	 on	 the	 medium-term	 macroeconomic	
prospects.

(d).	Strengthening	public	sector	capacity	and	governance	

80. The effectiveness and efficacy of the various path-
ways in ending poverty and boosting shared pros-
perity will depend critically on the capacity of 
Government to design and implement the right in-
terventions, whether in the form of policy, institu-
tional reforms, or investments. Each	of	the	identified	
intervention	areas	will	require	careful	identification	and	
design	 of	 more	 specific	 policies,	 programs,	 and	 proj-
ects	 to	 remove	 the	key	constraints	as	well	as	effective	
and	efficient	implementation	and	coordination.	This	 is	
where	 the	 technical	 capacity	 of	 the	 public	 sector	 be-
comes	critical.	In	addition,	it	will	require	strong	institu-
tions	of	governance	 to	ensure	 that	 services	are	delive- 
red	in	a	transparent	and	efficient	manner.

Growth	 accelerated	 in	 recent	 years	 (see	 paragraph	 8).  
Inflation	 declined	 significantly	 from 22.5	 percent	 in	
2008/09	 to	5.7	percent	 in	2013/14	 ,	due	mainly	 to	 im-
proved	fiscal	discipline	by	the	new	Government,	which	
has	committed	to	keeping	the	fiscal	deficit	below	5	per-
cent	 of	 GDP.	 In	 addition,	 there	 has	 been	 a	 significant	
policy	 shift	 in	 the	 financing	 of	 the	 fiscal	 deficit	 from	
reliance	 on	 the	 printing	 of	money	 towards	 greater	 use	
of	 treasury	 bonds.	 Management	 of	 the	 exchange	 rate	
has	also	improved	significantly	following	the	floatation	
of	the	exchange	rate	on	April	1st,	2012.	As	a	result,	the	
official	 and	 parallel	 market	 exchange	 rates	 have	 now	
converged	 (See	Table	4).	Similarly,	with	support	 from	
the	international	community,	the	country	has	managed	
to	 clear	 all	 external	 debt	 arrears.	As	 a	 result,	 total	 ex-
ternal	debt	has	declined	significantly	from	37.7	percent	
of	GDP	in	2008/09	to	24.6	percent	in	2012/13.	The	last	
three	joint	World	Bank	–	IMF	debt	sustainability	analy-
ses	have	concluded	that	Myanmar	is	at	low	risk	of	debt	
distress.		

79. The medium-term economic outlook is favorable 
but faces significant downside risks, particular 
weak institutional capacity for macroeconomic 
management and the possibility of a slow down 
or steps back in the transition. Under	 the	 baseline	
scenario	 (see	Table	 4),	 growth	 is	 expected	 to	 increase	
slightly	further,	averaging	8.4	percent	over	the	next	few	
years.	 The	 key	 underlying	 assumptions	 are	 continued	
strong	 performance	 in	 the	 productive	 sectors,	 includ-
ing	 construction	 and	 manufacturing	 in	 special	 export	
zones,	 and	 robust	 performance	 in	 the	 service	 sectors.		
The	 nominal	 and	 real	 effective	 exchange	 rates	 have	
been	depreciating	 and	 are	projected	 to	 continue	doing	
so	 in	the	medium	term.30	 	 Inflation	is	forecast	to	reach	
6.6	 percent	 in	 2014/15,	 fueled	 by	 electricity	 price	 in-
creases	and	demand	pressures,	but	should	moderate	in	
following	years.	The	external	current	account	deficit	is	
projected	 to	 be	 around	 4.9	 percent	 of	GDP,	 but	 is	 ex-
pected	to	be	more	than	offset	by	rising	FDI-related	in-
flows	while	 the	fiscal	deficit	 is	projected	 to	 rise	 to	4.5	
percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2014/15	 mainly	 due	 to	 significant	
increases	in	transfers	to	state	and	regional	governments	
and	 an	 increase	 in	 civil	 servants	 salaries.	 In	 spite	 of	 a	
general	positive	outlook,	the	economy	faces	significant	
downside	 risks.	 Basic	 macroeconomic	 management	
tools	are	still	being	built	and	the	authorities’	capacity	to	
develop	 and	 implement	 policies	 and	 absorb	 technical	
assistance	 is	 already	 stretched.	 Given	 Myanmar’s	 de-
pendence	on	gas,	strong	capacity	will	be	needed	to	deal	
with	 the	 challenging	 reforms	 that	 can	 foster	 inclusive	
growth,	 including	 growth	 of	 the	 non-resource	 sectors	
which	 will	 be	 needed	 to	 diversify	 the	 economy.	 The	
CBM’s	 international	 reserves	would	 be	 insufficient	 to	
resist	short-term	exchange	rate	pressures,	should	antic-

30 
 The real depreciation in Myanmar is in contrast to the normal 
pattern observed in other fast growing countries in East Asia where the real 
exchange rate has been appreciating.  While further study might be needed, 
this difference in outcome could be explained by the limited capacity of the 
economy to absorb foreign investment, the unattractive real interest rate 
which discourages hot money inflows and limited gains in productivity.

34 | World Bank report

Table 4:  Myanmar: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, FY09-17

(i).	 Improving	public	sector	capacity	for	policy	making,	coor-
dination,	and	service	delivery

81. Broadly, the Myanmar civil service suffers from a 
deficiency of critical skills. To	a	large	extent,	this	is	a	
result	of	decades	of	under-investment	in	education	and	
brain	drain.	However,	this	has	been	compounded	by	the	
fact	 that	existing	public	sector	 training	programs	have	
been	deficient	in	equipping	civil	servants	with	the	crit-
ical	 skills	needed	 to	 effectively	and	 efficiently	design,	
implement,	coordinate,	monitor,	and	evaluate	Govern-
ment	 policies	 and	 programs.	As	 a	 result,	 there	 is	 defi-
ciency	within	Government	of	certain	specialist	skills	in	
the	areas	of	policy	analysis,	planning,	and	formulation,	
procurement,	 monitoring,	 and	 evaluation.	 In	 addition,	
current	 organizational	 structures	 do	 not	 provide	 for	
these	specialized	 functions	 in	most	ministries.	Finally,	
as	a	 legacy	of	 the	past,	 there	 is	 lack	of	 initiative,	criti-
cal	thinking,	and	orientation	to	conduct	policy	analysis,	
provide	 policy	 advice	 and	 implement	 policy	 amongst	
technocrats,	both,	at	central	Government	level,	as	well	
as	within	line	ministries	and	agencies;	and	government	
has	a	pronounced	“silo”	character,	whereby	ministries	
and	agencies	do	not	coordinate	well	with	each	other.	

82. The country’s legacy of excessive bureaucracy and 
its opening up have further stretched the already 
weak capacity of the public sector, with a high risk 
of staff attrition. In	particular,	 the	workload	of	 regu-
lations	and	management	that	each	policy	and	new	law	
entail	 further	 stretch	 the	 already	 limited	 expertise	 and	
technical	 capacity	 of	 the	 bureaucracy.	 In	 addition,	 in	
spite	of	the	recent	increases	in	the	salaries	of	civil	ser-
vants,	pay	and	compensation	of	civil	servants	in	Myan-
mar	remain	very	low.	As	a	result,	the	increase	in	foreign	
direct	 investment	 in	 response	 to	 the	 country’s	 reform	
drive	 poses	 a	 significant	 risk	 to	 the	 competiveness	 of	
the	public	sector	and	hence,	 its	capacity	 to	 retain	civil	
servants	with	skills	that	are	on	high	demand.	

83. The establishment of Delivery Units (DUs) is aimed 
at improving the effectiveness of the public sector 
to deliver some tangible results in the context of 
reforms. Established	in	August	2013,	the	DUs	are	es-
sentially	 sub-committees	 of	 Cabinet	 level	 committees	
with	the	overall	objective	to	implement	“quick	wins”	in	
service	delivery.		However,	it	is	not	clear	how	the	DUs	
fit	 within	 a	 broader	 public	 sector	 reform	 framework	
that	 is	 aimed	 at	 dealing	 with	 the	 underlying	 capacity	
constraints.	

84. A key priority will therefore be to strengthen the 
capacity of Government agencies to come up with 
appropriate sector strategies that are consistent 
with Government policy priorities and well-coordi-
nated with other sectors; and to improve the Cen-
ter of Government’s efficiency in coordination and 
delivery of services. In	 this	way,	 binding	 constraints	
which	 derive	 from	 government	 systems	 can	 be	 ad-
dressed. The	development	of	the	necessary	specialized	
skills	will	take	time.	In	addition,	a	systematic	approach	

World Bank report | 35

requires	that	a	careful	diagnostic	be	undertaken	to	iden-
tify	the	binding	capacity	constraints	within	each	of	the	
identified	intervention	areas	and	at	the	Center.	Howev-
er,	 progress	 can	 be	made	 in	 the	 near	 term	 in	 ensuring	
that	different	sectors	come	up	with	sector	strategies	that	
indicate	sector	priorities,	no	matter	how	basic	the	strat-
egies	may	be.	Through	 the	sector	working	groups	 that	
have	been	established,	 these	sector	strategies	will	also	
provide	a	forum	for	coordination	of	efforts	by	Govern-
ment,	development	partners,	 and	 the	private	 sector.	 In	
addition,	the	efficiency	of	Government	in	making	deci-
sions,	 coordination,	 and	 delivering	 of	 services	 can	 be	
significantly	improved,	including	by	leveraging	on	ICT	
through	the	introduction	of	e-governance.		

85. Sectoral approaches to capacity building have 
been effective in addressing some of the capacity 
constraints. Some	ministries	are	 formulating	and	 im-
plementing	 reform	 programs	 that	 among	 other	 issues,	
seek	to	address	specific	capacity	constraints.	In	partic-
ular,	progress	has	been	made	in	PFM,	pensions,	health,	
education,	energy,	safety	nets,	and	telecommunications,	
just	to	mention	a	few.	Therefore	this	offers	another	av-
enue	that	needs	to	be	explored	in	dealing	with	some	of	
the	capacity	weaknesses	in	the	public	sector.		

86. Improving the quality of data by strengthening 
statistical systems will be critical to promoting ev-
idence-based policy making. Even	if	the	authorizing	
environment	and	culture	becomes	more	conducive,	the	
capacity	 of	 the	 Government	 to	 formulate	 appropriate	
policies	 and	 strategies	 will	 be	 hampered	 by	 the	 poor	
quality	of	data	and	knowledge	gaps.	A	key	opportunity	
lies	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 improving	 the	 quality	 of	 statis-
tics	is	one	of	the	four	policy	priorities	identified	by	the	
new	 Government.	 In	 addition,	 development	 partners	
have	 committed	 to	 supporting	 the	 Government	 in	 the	
preparation	of	a	National	Strategy	for	the	Development	
of	Statistics	(NSDS)	that	will	ensure	a	more	systemat-
ic	 approach	 to	 the	 strengthening	 of	 statistical	 systems	
as	 well	 as	 funding	 elements	 of	 the	 strategy	 once	 it	 is	
finalized.31 

87. Finally, fostering transparency will be key to re-
ducing interference of politicians in decisions and 
processes that are technical in nature. Encouraging	
technocrats	to	play	a	more	prominent	role	in	designing	
processes	 and	 making	 decisions	 that	 are	 technical	 in	
nature	 may	 not	 be	 effective	 unless	 the	 system	 makes	
it	 difficult	 for	 politicians	 to	 interfere.	 In	 this	 context,	
designing	 systems	 and	 processes	 that	 are	 transparent	
will	be	critical.	

31 
 The NSDS sets out the strategic goals of the statistical system 
over the medium term, usually, 5 years (but could be longer) by assessing 
the current situation, identifying needs and gaps and developing action 
plans and budgets.

36 | World Bank report

ii).	 Strengthening	governance	institutions	and	reducing	
corruption

88. Improving the governance environment will be a 
critical pre-requisite to unlocking Myanmar’s po-
tential to grow and reduce poverty. In	order	to	have	
a	good	foundation	for	growth	and	inclusiveness,	inves-
tors	and	the	general	population	need	to	have	confidence	
in	the	public	sector’s	capacity	to	protect	stable	property	
rights,	 enforce	 the	 rule	 of	 law,	 effectively	 implement	
anti-corruption	 policies,	 promote	 participation,	 and	
achieve	government	accountability.	

89. Progress has been made in improving participatory 
development through decentralization. Apart from 
strengthening	the	role	of	parliament	in	the	bourgeoning	
democracy,	 efforts	 have	 been	 made	 to	 devolve	 politi-
cal,	 administrative,	 and	 fiscal	 powers	 to	 sub-national 
governments.	 Since	 2011,	 the	 Government	 has	 em-
phasized	 “people-centered	 development,”	 by	 creating 
consultative	bodies	or	elected	positions	at	state/regional,	
township,	 district,	 and	 village	 levels	 (Nixon	&	 Joelen,	
2014).	In	rural	development,	the	government	has	begun	
to	 address	 significant	 investment	 needs	 by	 providing	
grants	 to	 village	 tracts	 and	 shifting	 decision-making	
(and	prioritization)	authority	to	communities	themselves	
as	part	of	the	people-centered	approach	to	development.	
In	addition,	there	has	been	an	increase	in	the	amount	of	
resources	transferred	to	states	and	regions	(World	Bank	
PER,	forthcoming).	

90. In spite of progress made in the devolution of au-
thority to regional and local governments, weak-
nesses remain. First,	 the	 functional	 responsibilities	
that	have	been	devolved	to	states	and	regions	so	far	are	
too	 limited	 for	 meaningful	 decentralized	 governance	
(World	 Bank	 PER,	 forthcoming).	 In	 particular,	 unlike	
in	 most	 decentralized	 systems,	 basic	 education	 and	
health	remain	under	the	purview	of	the	central	govern-
ment.	In	addition,	the	lack	of	clarity	on	the	division	of	
responsibilities	 in	 some	 of	 the	 areas	 represents	 a	 tre-
mendous	risk	to	improving	access	to	required	services.	
Also,	while	progress	has	been	made	to	ensure	equity	in	
determining	 inter-governmental	 fiscal	 transfers,	 there	
remains	a	lack	of	clarity	on	the	parameters	considered	
in	determining	the	specific	amounts	transferred	to	each	
individual	state	or	region.	In	this	regard,	there	is	a	par-
ticular	concern	that	states	and	regions	from	which	nat-
ural	 resource	 revenues	 are	 derived	 do	 not	 yet	 receive	
shares	 that	 reflect	 their	 respective	 contributions	 and	
burdens.			

91. Corruption in Myanmar is perceived and reported 
to be high. A	major feature	of	corruption	in	Myanmar	
has	 been	 a	 phenomenon	 known	 as	 “cronyism” where	
a	 few	people	with	 connections	 to	 the	military	govern-
ment	benefitted	from	business	contracts	and	public	ap-
pointments.	In	2012,	Myanmar	 ranked	172	out	of	175	
countries	on	the	Corruption	Perceptions	Index	In	2013,	
its	rank	improved	to	157	out	of	177	countries.	The	im-
provement	 may	 reflect	 in	 part	 some	 anti-corruption	

measures	by	the	Government.	In	January	2013,	an	An-
ti-Corruption	Committee	was	 formed	 followed	 by	 the	
enactment	of	an	Anti-Corruption	Law	in	August	2013.	
In	 addition,	 in	 2013,	 the	 authorities	 awarded	 licenses	
to	two	foreign	mobile	companies	through	an	open	ten-
der	process	 that	was	widely	hailed	as	very	 transparent	
by	 international	 standards.	 Going	 forward,	 improved	
transparency	 in	 the	 management	 of	 the	 extractive	 in-
dustries	 will	 be	 critical	 given	 their	 role	 as	 a	 major	
source	 of	 public	 revenues.	 Having	 attained	 EITI	 can-
didate	 status,	 it	will	 be	 important	 for	 the	Government	
to	meet	its	obligations	under	the	initiative	of	producing	
the	first	audit	report	within	the	next	18	months.

92. An apparent lack of capacity of the judiciary to 
uphold the rule of law, including the protection 
of property rights, is widely perceived as a major 
weakness in Myanmar’s governance environment. 
The	 degree	 of	merit-based	 appointment	within	 the	 ju-
dicial	system	is	unclear,	as	there	is	no	independent	pro-
cess	for	appointing	even	lower	court	judges.	Given	the	
history	of	military	rule,	there	remains	a	strong	percep-
tion	within	 civil	 society	 that	 judges	 are	 susceptible	 to	
corruption	and	bribery.		Moreover,	judges	have	seldom	
given	any	explanation	or	written	 justification	for	deci-
sions,	 leading	 to	 the	 perception	 that	 they	were	 largely	
carrying	out	instructions	from	the	executive	rather	than	
applying	and	enforcing	the	rule	of	law.

(iii).	Mobilizing	public	financial	resources	and	improving	the	
quality	of	expenditure

93. Sustaining improvements made so far on improved 
access to information and freedom of the media 
will be critical to improved governance. The	histori- 
cal	 dominance	 of	 the	military	 has	meant	 that	 genuine	
participation,	voice	or	representation	in	the	broader	na-
tional	government	were	 limited,	and	attempts	 to	voice	
dissent	were	suppressed	harshly.		Now,	as	part	of	the	re-
form	process,	newspapers	and	journals	are	freely	pub-
lishing	information,	which	was	previously	not	possible.	
Similarly,	 previously	 exiled	media	 organizations	 have	
also	been	able	to	establish	operations	within	the	coun-
try.	According	 to	 Reporters	Without	 Borders,	 “thanks	
to	 the	 Burmese	 spring’s	 unprecedented	 reforms	 [on	
press	freedom],	it	has	reached	its	best-ever	position”	of	
151	 out	 of	 179	 countries	 on	 the	 Press	 Freedom	 Index	
in	 2013.	 Government	 transparency	 with	 information	
has	 increased	 considerably,	 although	 a	 key	 limitation	
is	the	unreliability	of	some	data,	particularly	from	sur-
veys.	Building	 on	 these	 improvements	will	 be	 critical	
to	 improved	 governance,	 including	 the	 fight	 against	
corruption.

World Bank report | 37

to	 considerable	 negotiation	 of	 tax	 liabilities	 between	
tax	officers	and	individuals.	This	also	compromises	the	
fairness	 and	 equity	 of	 the	 tax	 system,	 at	 a	 time	 when	
Myanmar	 is	 eager	 to	 encourage	 both	 foreign	 and	 do-
mestic	 investment	 and	 private	 sector	 growth.	 Follow-
ing	 recent	 improvements	 in	 tax	 and	non-tax	 revenues,	
Myanmar’s	revenue	efforts	are	now	well	within	region-
al	 levels	 (See	 Figures	 19	 and	 20). There	 has	 recently	
been	some	progress	in	reforming	tax	administration,	in-
cluding	through	the	establishment	of	a	Large	Taxpayer	
Office.	However,	there	is	still	need	to	accelerate	policy	
reforms	 to	 broaden	 the	 tax	 base	 and	 simplify	 the	 tax	
structure.	

95. Significant off-budget revenue flows cause budget 
fragmentation, elevate fiduciary risks, and raise 
transparency issues. According	to	the	Public	Expen-
diture	 and	 Financial	 Accountability	 (PEFA)	 assess-
ment,	 approximately	 40	 percent	 of	 revenues	 (mostly	
from	the	natural	resource	sector)	are	managed	through	
Other	 Accounts	 at	 the	 MEB	 which	 are	 essentially	
off-budget.	 Such	 off-budget	 financing	 fragments	 and	
undermines	 strategic	 resource	 allocation	 through	 the	
budget,	 weakens	 external	 oversight,	 and	 gives	 rise	 to	
concerns	about	accountability	and	transparency.

96. The Government has not yet significantly exploited 
the potential for public private partnerships, although 
efforts are underway. Over	the	last	twenty	years,	gov-
ernments	of	developing	economies	have	embraced	the	
private	sector	as	a	source	of	efficiency	and	 innovation	
as	 well	 as	 a	 partner	 in	mobilizing	 financing	 for	 infra-
structure	 and	 service	 provision.	 In	 stark	 contrast,	 offi-
cial	 government	 policy	 has	 promoted	 the	 sourcing	 of	
public	 sector	 needs	 from	 SEEs.	 Given	 the	 country’s	
significant	 development	 needs,	 there	 has	 been	 over-
whelming	 private	 sector	 interest.	 However,	 Myanmar	
has	not	significantly	exploited	this	potential	but	efforts	
to	scale	up	PPPs	are	now	underway	with	support	from	
development	partners.	

97. Given Myanmar’s large development needs, limited 
fiscal space, and high dependence on gas sector, the 
quality of expenditure will be critical to accelerating 
growth and making it inclusive. Ensuring	quality	ex-
penditure	is	always	critical	for	achieving	development	
objectives	but	is	especially	critical	in	the	case	of	Myan-
mar	given	its	huge	development	needs	but	limited	fiscal	
space.	In	addition,	given	the	high	prominence	of	the	gas	
sector	 in	 the	 country’s	 economic	 structure,	 the	quality	
of	 expenditure	 will	 play	 pivotal	 role	 in	 ensuring	 that	
growth	 is	 inclusive.	 In	 particular,	 since	 the	 gas	 sector	
on	 its	own	does	not	 create	many	 jobs,	 its	 contribution	
to	 inclusive	growth	will	be	 through	 the	Government’s	
success	in	utilizing	gas	revenues	in	a	way	that	helps	to	
spur	growth	in	labor	intensive	sectors	and	improves	the	
delivery	of	services.

Source: Ministry of Finance, IMF and World Development Indica-
tors, 2014

94. The level of public financial resources remains 
inadequate to meet the country’s critical develop-
ment spending needs, although there have recently 
been significant improvements. A	 narrow	 tax	 base 
and	 weak	 compliance	 have	 curtailed	 tax	 returns,	 as	 a	
result	 of	 the	 extensive	 use	 of	 exemptions,	 and	 an	 out-
moded	 tax	 administration	 system. Myanmar’s	 current	
system	of	tax	administration	is	characterized	by	official	
assessment	 rather	 than	 self-assessment,	 and	 is	 subject	

38 | World Bank report

98. In spite of recent improvements, a major weakness 
in Myanmar’s quality of expenditure remains the 
low level of resources allocated to health and ed-
ucation. Public	 expenditure	 on	 health	 increased	 from	
0.2	percent	of	GDP	in	2011/12	to	1.5	percent	of	GDP	in	
2012/13	while	that	of	education	increased	from	0.8	per-
cent	of	GDP	 to	1.6	during	the	same	period.	In	spite	of	
these	large	increases,	Myanmar’s	expenditure	on	health	
and	 education	 remains	 low	 by	 international	 standards	
(see	Figures	21	 and	22).	 	 	 In	 addition,	while	 the	Gov-
ernment	 has	 increased	 its	 own	 financial	 allocation	 to	
the	sectors,	operational	costs	for	institutions	delivering	
services	at	 the	front	 line	remain	underfunded.	Most	of	
the	additional	resources	have	gone	towards	capital	ex-
penditures	and	salaries.	

99. More generally, weaknesses along various stages of 
the budget cycle undermine the quality of expen-
diture in Myanmar, and hence, reduce prospects 
for achieving the Government’s poverty reduction 
policy objectives. First,	the	budget	preparation	frame-
work	and	process	are	not	appropriately	designed	to	en-
sure	that	resources	are	allocated	to	policy	priorities.	At	
present,	 most	 of	 the	 Budget	 Department’s	 manpower	
is	 absorbed	 in	 performing	 cumbersome	 routine	 tasks	
of	 budget	 compilation	 and	 reporting.	A	 Fiscal	 Policy	
and	 Strategy	 Division	 in	 the	 Budget	 Department	 has	
just	 been	 established	 and	 is	 yet	 to	 become	 operation-
al.	Therefore,	key	budgetary	decisions	have	been	made	
without	being	informed	by	rigorous	analytical	founda-
tions.	Proposed	budgets	submitted	by	line	ministries	to	
MOF	and	thereafter	to	Parliament	are	simply	a	collec-
tion	 of	 line	 items	without	 narratives	 and	 therefore	 not	
easy	 to	 analyze	 the	 budget-policy	 linkages.	 Second,	
when	 it	 comes	 to	 implementation,	 a	 key	 weakness	 of	
the	expenditure	 framework	 is	 the	 lack	of	centrally	de-
fined	 standards	 in	 areas	 such	 as	 payroll	 management	
and	procurement.	Currently,	these	functions	are	highly	
delegated	 to	 ministries	 and	 spending	 units	 at	 differ-
ent	 levels	within	 them.	This	situation	has	allowed	 line	
agencies	to	develop	rules	and	regulations	in	isolation	of	
central	 guidance.	As	 a	 result,	 spending	 agencies	 have	
not	been	subjected	to	minimum	standards	and	controls	
to	ensure	value	for	money	in	spending.	This	has	created	
loopholes	 that	 have	 been	 exploited	 by	 some	 function-
aries.	 In	 addition,	 the	 official	 requirement	 to	 purchase	
from	 state-owned	 suppliers	 and	 producers	 has	 limited	
the	public	sector’s	ability	to	benefit	from	private	sector	
efficiencies	 and	 innovations.	 Finally,	 a	 key	 weakness	
in	Myanmar’s	public	expenditure	framework	has	been	
lack	 of	 focus	 on	 results	 and	 outcomes.	 For	 example,	
within	 education,	 there	 is	 no	 national	 assessment	 of	
learning	 outcomes	 at	 the	 lower	 levels	 of	 basic	 educa-
tion.	Therefore,	no	one	knows	if	increased	expenditure	
to	education	is	achieving	the	desired	results.

Source: World Bank, Public Expenditure Review (forthcoming)

100. Since the reforms started, opportunities abound 
but there are risks too. There	 is	 high	 level	 political	
and	 technical	buy-in	 to	modernize	 the	PFM	backbone	
to	 support	 service	 delivery.	The	 Parliament,	 Office	 of	
the	 President,	 and	 key	 economic	 ministries,	 are	 keen	
to	modernize	and	reform	the	system	to	improve	service	
delivery,	 foster	 greater	 transparency,	 and	 link	 polices	
to	 fiscal	 outlays.	 The	 entering	 into	 the	 market	 of	 two	
mobile	 phone	 companies	 will	 significantly	 improve	
telecommunication	 services	 and	 hence	 provide	 a	 plat-
form	 for	 a	 more	 automated	 and	 interconnected	 PFM	
system.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 increasing	 pressure	 from	
executive	 and	 scrutiny	 from	 legislative	 branch	 could	
result	 in	 rushed	 and	 uncoordinated	 reform	 efforts,	 to	
the	detriment	of	a	mature	system.	Similarly,	vested	in-
terests	 that	 have	 benefited	 from	 a	 weak	 PFM	 system	
could	frustrate	reform	efforts.	In	natural	resource	man-
agement,	 a	 key	 opportunity	 is	 the	 strong	 political	will	
to	 greater	 transparency	 in	 the	 sector	 demonstrated	 by	

the	Government’s	 commitment	 and	 progress	made	 on	
EITI	manifested	 in	 the	 recent	 attainment	 of	 candidate	
status.	 Finally,	 the	 fiscal	 decentralization	 drive	 offers	
an	opportunity	for	improving	the	quality	of	expenditure	
through	better	alignment	of	 resource	allocations	 to	 lo-
cal	circumstances	and	development	needs	as	well	as	in-
creased	and	more	direct	mechanisms	of	accountability.	

2. Promoting universal access to basic services and em-
powerment for inclusive growth, particularly in rural areas

101. As most poor people in Myanmar live in rural 
areas and have limited access to critical services, 
promoting universal access and extending services 
to the rural poor and other disadvantaged groups, 
will have a high impact. Access to rural infrastruc-
ture	 (rural	 electrification,	 roads,	 telephone	 services)	
will	 empower	 the	 rural	 poor	 by	 facilitating	 access	 to	
basic	 social	 services,	 and	 by	 enhancing	 opportunities	
for	and	raising	 incomes	from	productive	activities.	 	In	
turn,	 improved	 access	 to	 basic	 social	 services	 (health,	
education,	water	and	sanitation)	will	help	deal	with	the	
non-income	 dimension	 of	 poverty,	 and	 investments	
in	 human	 capital	 are	 crucial	 in	 preparing	 people	 for	
productive	work	 and	 empowering	 them	 to	 pursue	 op-
portunities	in	the	labor	market.		In	appropriate	circum-
stances,	social	protection	interventions	may	support	the	
empowerment	agenda	 through	facilitating	human	cap-
ital	acquisition	(e.g.,	by	increasing	the	demand	for	and	
usage	of	education	and	health	 services	 through	condi-
tional	cash	transfers),	providing	income	smoothing	for	
the	poor	 (e.g.	seasonal	public	works	 to	provide	mean-
ingful	temporary	employment	during	the	lean	season),	
or	providing	last	resort	support	for	those	without	work	
ability	(e.g.	disabled	elderly)	where	resources	permit.			

	(a)	Ensuring	universal	access	to	social	services

102. The health status of the people of Myanmar is 
low and does not compare favorably with other 
countries in the region. Among	 ASEAN	 countries,	
Myanmar	 has	 the	 lowest	 life	 expectancy	 at	 birth,	 and	
second-highest	 in	 terms	 of	 infant	 and	 under	 five	mor-
tality	 rates,	 prevalence	 of	 underweight,	 prevalence	 of	
HIV	and	incidence	of	tuberculosis.		Maternal	and	child	
mortality	 and	 malnutrition	 remain	 serious	 problems	
for	 Myanmar,	 although	 there	 have	 been	 significant	
improvements	 in	 the	 past	 two	 decades,	 with	maternal	
mortality	 now	 lower	 than	 in	most	 countries	 in	 the	 re-
gion	(Figure	23).	

World Bank report | 39

103. Decades of low public spending means that house-
holds have to shoulder a large part of the costs, 
with significant disparities in geographical cove- 
rage and minimal quality of services delivered. 
Myanmar	has	one	of	 the	 lowest	Government	expendi-
tures	on	health	globally.		In	2011-2012	the	health	sector	
accounted	for	only	1.3	percent	of	total	government	ex-
penditure	(about	US$	2	per	person	per	year).	As	a	result	
of	 these	 low	 levels	 of	 spending,	 out-of-pocket	 (OOP)	
payments	are	exceptionally	high,	accounting	for	almost	
80	percent	of	 total	health	spending,	one	of	 the	highest	
in	the	world.		In	addition,	many	areas	of	the	country	are	
poorly	served	by	health	services,	with	difficult	terrain,	
geographical	 remoteness,	 conflict	 and	 cultural	 diver-
sity	 hindering	 the	 delivery	 of	 essential	 services.	 Even	
where	services	are	available,	systemic	challenges	seri-
ously	undermine	the	quality	of	the	services	delivered.	

 
40 | World Bank report

104. Increasing access to basic quality health would 
have a high impact on poverty reduction and some 
key actions can be scaled up relatively quickly. Ba-
sic	 health	 has	 strong	 complementarities	 and	 linkages	
with	 basic	 education,	 sanitation,	 and	 agriculture	 pro-
ductivity.	 Further,	 the	 opportunity	 cost	 of	 ill	 health	 in	
a	household	is	very	high	in	terms	of	lost	opportunities.	
Therefore,	in	light	of	the	high	deficiency	gap	compared	
to	other	countries,	action	on	improving	access	to	health	
would	have	a	high	impact	on	poverty	reduction.	In	ad-
dition,	the	impact	on	poverty	reduction	can	be	realized	
relatively	 quickly,	 with	 key	 additional	 areas	 of	 action	
relatively	 easier	 to	 implement	 -	 they	mainly	 entail	 in-
creasing	budgetary	allocation	 to	health	and	 scaling	up	
existing	 programs	 such	 as	 provision	 of	 free	 essential	
drugs	 at	 primary	 health	 care	 facilities	 and	 township	
hospitals,	and	provision	of	free	health	care	services	for	
children	 under	 5,	 pregnant	 mothers,	 and	 free	 hospital	
admission	 on	 the	 first	 day	 for	 patients	 needing	 emer-
gency	surgery.

105. In basic education, although enrollment rates in 
Myanmar are respectable (Figure 24) by inter-
national comparison, completion rates indicate 
a significant problem and quality has been poor. 
Only	about	11	percent	of	a	cohort	graduates	from	high	
school,	 around	 30	 percent	 of	 the	 students	 reach	 to	 the	
end	 of	 high	 school	 and	 about	 25	 percent	 of	 a	 cohort	
leaves	basic	education	after	primary	school.	

106. Private costs associated with attending education 
represent an important reason why poor house-
holds have been excluded in Myanmar. Although	
the	 economic	 burden	 faced	 by	 parents	 does	 not	 seem	
excessive	 compared	 to	 neighboring	 countries,	 there	 is	
evidence	that	the	high	costs	to	households	(both	direct	
and	lose	of	child’s	labor)	is	a	barrier	for	households	in	
which	 children	 are	 not	 in	 school.	When	 these	 house-
holds	 are	 asked	why	 their	 children	 are	 not	 in	 schools,	
over	half	 (55.5	percent)	of	 the	main	 reasons	 identified	
for	never	attending	school	related	to	economic	and	cost	
factors	(World	Bank,	Forthcoming).		Since	both	the	di-
rect	and	 indirect	costs	of	education	 increase	as	a	child	
progresses	 through	 the	 education	 system,	 cost	 related	
factors	 are	 particularly	 an	 issue	 at	 the	 lower	 and	 up-
per-secondary	levels.

107. Action on increasing access to education and voca-
tional training would have a high impact on poverty 
reduction although its impact will not be realized in 
the short-term. Although	 the	 deficiency	 gap	 in	 terms	
of	overall	access	to	education	does	not	appear	wide	na-
tionally	compared	to	health,	quality	basic	education	has	
strong	complementarities	and	linkages	with	a	number	of	
other	areas	particularly	health,	water	and	sanitation,	ICT,	
financial	 services,	 all	of	which	 are	 critical	 for	 empow-
ering	 people	 to	 take	 full	 advantage	 of	 income	 earning	
opportunities.	Ensuring	that	students	have	foundational	
skills	 such	 as	 functional	 literacy	 as	 basic	 numeracy	 is 
especially	 critical	 for	 empowering	 people	 to	 benefit	
from	opportunities	for	wage	and	self-employment,	and	

allow	 them	 to	benefit	from	additional	 training,	 includ-
ing	vocational	training. However,	the	impact	on	pover- 
ty	reduction	of	improving	access	to	quality	basic	educa-
tion	is	not	likely	to	be	seen	in	the	short-term	since	edu- 
cation	has	a	relatively	longer	gestation	period.	But	this	
may	 also	be	 the	 reason	why	 action	needs	 to	 start	now	
so	that	the	impact	can	be	seen	sooner	rather	than	later.	

108. The picture on access to water and sanitation is 
mixed and is hampered by the fact that data on 
service coverage and functionality are unreliable.  
The	government	has	not	published	an	annual	statistical	
review	 since	 1997-832,	 while	 the	 last	 water	 sector	 re-
view	was	 in	199333.	 	Latest	Joint	Monitoring	Program	
(JMP)	 data	 suggest	 a	 broadly	 positive	 state	 of	 affairs,	
with	levels	of	access	to	improved	water	supply	and	san-
itation	that	are	high	and	compare	well	to	regional	aver-
ages	for	both	rural	and	urban	areas.	However,	the	data	
also	shows	significant	disparities	in	access	to	safe	water	
in	selected	parts	of	the	country,	indicating	large	areas	in	
which	the	population	depends	on	surface	water,	such	as	
open	ponds	and	shallow	wells,	for	drinking	water.	Fur-
thermore,	 township	 data	 indicate	 that	 diarrhea	 is	 still	
a	major	 killer	 of	 children	 under	 the	 age	 of	 five	which	
suggests	that	sanitation	is	still	a	problem	in	the	country.

109. Interventions for increasing access to water and 
sanitation would have a high impact on poverty re-
duction but the focus in the short-term would need 
to be on getting a handle of the data situation. Giv-
en	that	water	and	sanitation	are	basic	needs,	improving	
access	 can	 therefore	 be	 expected	 to	 have	 a	 high	 and	
direct	 impact	 on	 poverty	 reduction.	 In	 addition,	 there	
are	 strong	 complementarities	 with	 health	 –	 better	 ac-
cess	to	water	and	sanitation	is	critical	to	the	prevention	
of	many	diseases.	However,	in	the	absence	of	credible	
data,	 initial	 work	 would	 need	 to	 focus	 on	 filling	 data	
gaps	on	the	size	of	the	deficiency	gap.							

(b).	Expanding	rural	infrastructure	networks	

110. Expanding critical rural infrastructure will be key 
to reducing poverty since it will integrate the ru-
ral with the peri-urban and urban economy and 
empower the rural poor to access social services 
and participate in income earning opportunities. 
Like	with	social	services,	access	to	critical	rural	infra-
structure	 such	 as	 ICT,	 electricity,	 and	 roads	 has	 been	
significantly	 low	 in	 rural	 areas.	 Greater	 emphasis	 on	
expanding	 coverage	 to	 rural	 areas	 can	 have	 a	 signifi-
cant	impact	in	reducing	poverty.				

32 
 Meehan, P. (2010) The WASH Sector in Myanmar: Addressing 
the Challenge of Building Sustainable WASH Services. WaterAid.

33 
 Cowater International in association with Thant Syn Co. Ltd., and 
General Administration Department, Urban Water Supply Division, United 
Nations Development Programme and The World Bank (1993) Water Supply 
and Sanitation Sector Review, Myanmar.  UNDP, MYA/86/012

 
111. While there is low access to ICT broadly in the 
country, most rural areas do not have access even 
to the most basic of ICT - telephone services. Tele-
communications	related	infrastructure	has	been	biased	
towards	 the	 urban	 areas	 in	 Myanmar,	 even	 though	
75–80	percent	of	the	population	lives	in	the	rural	areas.	
Rural	and	remote	areas	continue	to	have	poor	coverage	
which	has	limited	the	usage	of	mobile,	fixed	line	or	in-
ternet	when	travelling	to	the	rural	areas.		

112. The advent of wireless technology is an op-
portunity 
for 
increasing 
telecommunication 
access to people who live in the rural areas. 
Wireless	 technology	 can	 cover	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 areas	
without	 the	 use	 of	 physical	 cables,	 and	 its	 equipment	
is	 relatively	 easy	 to	 install	 (ADB,	 2014).	 Fixed	 lines	
are	expensive	to	install	and	deployment	requires	more	
time.	 Nonetheless,	 although	 wireless	 technology	 is	
relatively	 cheaper,	 access	 of	 sparsely	 populated	 and	
remote	areas	remain	an	issue	as	these	are	not	commer-
cially	viable	activities.		

113.  Expanding the rural telephone network can re-
duce poverty substantially, by empowering the 
rural poor to benefit from opportunities for pro-
ductive economic activities and service delivery. 
Through	 improved	 telephone	 access,	 the	 poor	 will	 be	
able	to	have	access	to	information	that	would	be	useful	
in	making	production	and	trading	decisions,	but	also	in	
facilitating	access	to	microfinance	and	critical	services	
such	 as	 health.	 	 Experience	 from	 other	 countries	 has	
shown	 that	 the	 benefits	 of	 using	 mobile	 phone	 tech-
nology	 in	health	 care	 systems	 in	developing	 countries	
are	 diverse,	 and	 include	 improved	 reporting	 in	 health	
information	 systems,	 telemedicine	 providing	 care	 to	
populations	otherwise	deprived,	and	texting	to	improve	
adherence	to	treatment	therapy.	

114. Similarly, rural electrification is critical to enhancing 
the inclusiveness of growth through empowerment. 
Reliable	access	to	electricity	will	be	key	to	the	creation	
of a conducive business environment for small and mi-
cro-enterprises	in	rural	areas.	In	addition,	electricity	is	
critical	to	improving	the	delivery	of	other	services	such	
as	health,	education,	security,	and	finance.	Lack	of	elec-
tricity	in	an	area	can	act	as	a	disincentive	for	qualified	
staff	 in	 health	 and	 education	 to	 locate	 in	 rural	 areas.	
Similarly,	lack	of	electricity	makes	it	difficult	for	rural	
hospitals	 and	 clinics	 to	 preserve	 drugs	 through	 refrig-
eration.	

115. At the same time, the proportion of people with-
out access to electricity in Myanmar is significant-
ly higher in the rural areas than in urban areas. 
While	the	electrification	rate	in	urban	areas	is	about	75	
percent	 (e.g.	 Yangon	 and	 Mandalay),	 the	 rural	 areas	
have	 an	 extremely	 low	 electrification	 rate	 of	 only	 16	
percent.	 In	 fact,	 most	 of	 rural	 communities	 in	 border	
areas	have	no	access	to	the	grid-based	electricity	at	all,	
and	some	regions	and	states	with	a	high	share	of	rural	
population	 (e.g.	 Ayeyarwaddy	 and	 Magway	 Regions	

World Bank report | 41

and	Rakhine	State)	have	access	 to	grid-based	electric-
ity	 below	 10	 percent,	 which	 is	 on	 par	 with	 only	 few	
very	 poor	 countries	 in	Africa.	Therefore,	 low	 level	 of	
rural	electrification	is	a	key	constraint	to	inclusiveness	
of	growth	in	Myanmar.

116. Also, although Myanmar has made significant 
progress in developing rural roads, most parts of 
the country remain difficult to reach. In	1988,	there	
were	 7,850	 kilometers	 of	 rural	 roads.	 Significant	 im-
provements	have	been	made	since.	Under	the	rural	de-
velopment	 program	 the	 road	 network	 reached	 57,700	
kilometers	in	2010.	Rural	bridges	also	increased	to	10,	
997	 kilometers	 from	 3,663	 kilometers	 in	 1988.	None-
theless,	half	of	the	rural	roads	in	Myanmar	remain	im-
passable	during	the	monsoon	season.	Therefore,	greater	
attention	needs	to	be	paid	to	improving	the	condition	of	
rural	roads.	

(c).	 Increasing	access	to	safety	nets	and	reducing	vulnerability

117. Given the high levels of vulnerability for house-
holds to fall into poverty, increasing access to safety 
nets and reducing vulnerability can also contribute 
to reducing poverty. This	is	particularly	important	in	
the	rural	areas	where	most	households	rely	on	agricul-
ture	for	their	livelihoods,	which	is	in	turn	susceptible	to	
weather	related	shocks.	Without	any	form	of	safety	net,	
natural	 disasters	 such	 as	 floods	 or	 draughts	 can	 easily	
plunge	 many	 people	 into	 poverty	 or	 deeper	 poverty.	 

118. At present, Myanmar’s formal social protection 
system does not adequately address the needs of its 
population. The	only	SP	sector	review	to	date	suggests	
that	 over	 95	 percent	 of	 the	 population	 has	 no	 access	
to	 predictable	 social	 protection,	 relying	 instead	 on	 in-
formal	and	community-based	coping	mechanisms	and	
ad	 hoc	 assistance	 from	 donor-financed	 programs.	The	
Government	 SP	 spending	 is	 almost	 entirely	 focused	
on	 social	 security	 provisions	 that	 benefit	 a	 small	 and	
relatively	privileged	section	of	the	population.	In	2012-
13,	the	expenditure	on	civil	service	pensions	and	social	
security	 provisions	 amounted	 to	 about	 0.5	 percent	 of	
GDP	and	constituted	2.3	percent	of	the	national	budget.	
However,	 these	old	age	pensions	and	health	 insurance	
provide	 inadequate	protection	due	 to	 low	pension	 lev-
els	(a	function	of	low	civil	service	wages)	and	weak	de-
livery	mechanisms.	 In	 addition,	 these	 programs	 cover	
only	the	small	group	of	formal	sector	workers,	leaving	
households	 vulnerable	 to	 health,	 weather-related	 and	
other	 shocks.	 Myanmar	 also	 in	 effect	 does	 not	 have	
a	 publicly	 financed	 safety	 net	 program;	 government	
spending	 on	 safety	 nets	was	 less	 than	 0.01	 percent	 of	
GDP	in	2012-13.	This	is	well	below	the	1-2	percent	of	
GDP	 being	 spent	 on	 safety	 nets	 in	 much	 of	 East	 and	
South	Asia,	 and	 even	 in	 poorer	 Sub-Saharan	African	
countries	 (World	 Bank	 2014).	At	 present,	 the	 biggest	
financers	of	SP	provision	in	Myanmar	are	development	
partners	engaged	predominantly	in	emergency	and	hu-
manitarian	 relief	with	 parallel,	 non-government	 deliv-
ery	mechanisms.	

42 | World Bank report

119. Opportunities exist for expanding safety net pro-
grams that would need to be leveraged. These	 in-
clude	the	emerging	political	and	fiscal	space	for	redis-
tributive	 policies,	 increased	 desire	 from	 Government	
for	 a	 transition	 from	 emergency-relief	 related	 and	
donor-funded	programs	 towards	 a	 sustainable	govern-
ment-led	social	protection	system	and	 increased	 focus	
on	 delivering	 benefits	 and	 services	 effectively	 to	 the	
poor.	Myanmar	also	has	a	latecomer’s	advantage	to	ben-
efit	from	international	experience	in	developing	build-
ing	blocks	for	a	robust	SP	system,	including	new	tech-
nology-based	 solutions.	There	 is	 compelling	 evidence	
that	SP	programs	have	contributed	to	reducing	poverty	
and	 inequality	 in	 both	 low	 and	 middle	 income	 coun-
tries,	and	countries	such	as	Ethiopia,	India,	Bangladesh,	
Pakistan,	Rwanda,	Nepal,	and	Ghana,	have	invested	in	
SP	programs	at	various	scales,	depending	on	the	specif-
ic	needs	and	fiscal	sustainability.34	Countries	at	an	early	
stage	 of	 development	 with	 emerging	 natural	 resource	
wealth	are	also	investing	in	SP	systems	(as	in	the	case	
of	 many	 African	 countries	 such	 as	 Mozambique).	 In	
many	cases,	SP	programs	in	both	LICs	and	MICs	lever-
age	human	capital	acquisition	and	livelihoods,	and	IMF	
analysis	 has	 demonstrated	 both	 benign	 growth	 effects	
and	 positive	 distributional	 impacts	 of	 such	 policies.	 

120. Apart from expanding safety nets, reducing vul-
nerability to poverty will require focusing on ef-
fective disaster risk management. It	is	the	poor	and	
vulnerable	 –	 women,	 children,	 the	 elderly,	 marginal-
ized	groups,	and	those	recovering	from	conflict	–	who	
often	are	most	exposed	to	hazards,	with	their	homes	in	
fragile	 and	 often	 low-lying	 environment	 are	 most	 af-
fected,	 and	 their	 lives	 feel	 the	 greatest	 pressure	 when	
droughts	increase	the	food	prices.	Myanmar	is	exposed	
to	 multiple	 natural	 hazards	 which	 include	 cyclone,	
storm	 surge,	 floods,	 landslide,	 earthquake,	 Tsunami,	
drought,	 and	 forest	 fire.	The	 rainfall-induced	 flooding	
is	 a	 recurring	 phenomenon	 across	 the	 country	 while	
some	parts	of	the	country	are	exposed	to	landslide	and	
drought	risks.	As	per	the	data	from	1998	to	2007,	fires	
constituted	about	71	percent	of	reported	disaster	events,	
followed	 by	 floods	 (10	 percent),	 storms	 (11	 percent)	
and	 others	 (8	 percent)	 including	 earthquakes,	 tsunami	
and	landslides.35	Cyclone	Nargis	(2008)	was	the	worst	
natural	 disaster	 in	 the	 living	 memory	 of	 Myanmar,	
with	over	130,000	people	killed,	and	millions	affected	
by	 losses	 of	 homes	 and	 livelihoods.	 	The	 Post-Nargis	
Social	 Impact	 Monitoring	 indicates	 that	 women	 were	
more	likely	than	men	to	be	killed	by	Nargis	–	research	
in	40	townships	shows	that	at	least	396	women	and	338	
men	died.	 	The	 study	 found	 that	women	 typically	had	
more	limited	access	to	information	with	regard	to	early	
disaster	warning36.	

34 
 See for example Fiszbein et al 2011, Subbarao et al 2013, 
Velarde and Fernández 2011, Andrews et al 2013, World Bank 2013b, 
Himanshu and Sen (2013). 

35 

 Government of Myanmar (2009), page 1

121. At the same time, climate change also represents 
a major challenge for Myanmar. The	country	 is	al-
ready	experiencing	increased	climate	variability	(nota-
bly	with	 regard	 to	 rainfall),	 is	significantly	exposed	 to	
extreme	 events	 (notably	 destructive	 cyclones),	 and	 is	
expected	to	experience	increased	temperatures,	heavier	
rains	but	also	longer	dry	spells	with	fast	growing	impact	
in	the	coming	decades.		Myanmar	has	experienced	dev-
astating	cyclones	Mala,	Nargis	and	Giri	in	2006,	2008	
and	2010	respectively,	claiming	thousands	of	lives.	Cy-
clone	Nargis	was	the	worst,	claiming	130,000	lives.	Ten	
percent	 of	 the	 country	 is	 projected	 be	 further	 affected	
by	a	sea-level	rise	of	between	one	and	five	meters.	The	
country	therefore	ranks	among	the	world’s	top	countries	
most	at	risk	from	the	combined	effects	of	climate	change.	 

122. Currently, Myanmar faces many challenges to ef-
fective management of the environment and mit-
igation of climate change impacts. At	 present,	 the	
country’s	 legislation	 covering	 natural	 resources	 does	
not	define	the	licensing	process,	the	role	of	government	
authorities,	or	the	fiscal	system	for	extractives	revenues.	
Environmental	disturbances	by	mining	industry	are	in-
creasing	 but	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 accompanied	 by	 sub-
stantive	regulatory	responses.	In	addition,	there	is	limi- 
ted	 information	 on	 the	 management	 of	 the	 extractive	
sector.	The	country	has	no	freedom	of	information	law	
and	 there	 is	 no	 requirement	 to	 prepare	 or	 implement	
environmental	 and	 social	 impact	 assessments	 (ESIA).	
The	legal	formulation	and	implementation	of	the	ESIA	
rules	 and	 regulations,	 relevant	 pollution	 control	 rules	
and	regulation	for	solid	and	hazardous	waste	manage-
ment	have	been	just	recently	launched	for	development	
in	line	with	best	international	practices.	

3. Promoting openness and sustainable private sector led  
    growth for more jobs 

123. In order to sustainably reduce poverty for the tran-
sitional and traditional poor in Myanmar, there is 
need to create jobs outside agriculture and to in-
crease returns to agriculture. Given	that	the	gas	sec-
tor	 is	 not	 labor	 intensive	 while	 the	 agricultural	 sector	
will	not	be	able	to	create	enough	jobs	to	absorb	all	the	
transitional	poor	while	returns	in	the	sector	are	low	for	
the	traditional	poor,	efforts	need	to	be	focused	on	pro-
moting	greater	private	sector	investment	in	the	non-gas	
sectors	and	increased	productivity	in	agriculture.	Sectors	
outside	the	agriculture	and	gas	sectors	with	potential	for	
creating	jobs	in	Myanmar	include	manufacturing,	min-
ing,	tourism,	ICT,	the	financial	sector,	and	construction.		 

124. Myanmar can start tapping opportunities in the 
context of regional and global production/value 
chain networks. Sophisticated	 production	 and	 distri-
butional	 networks	 in	 East	 Asia	 have	 been	 developed	
through	 fragmentation	 of	 production	 activities	 across	
borders	(Kudo,	2009).	In	particular,	multinational	cor-
porations	divide	their	manufacturing	processes	into	sep-

36 
 Finding from QSEM II presented corresponds with World Bank 
led research findings from the EAP region on the impact of natural disas-

ters on women.  

arate	production	blocks	and	locate	them	across	borders	
so	that	they	can	exploit	the	non-integrated	elements	of	
location	 advantages	 such	 as	wage	 differences.	Due	 to	
sanctions,	poor	policies,	infrastructure	and	connectivity, 
Myanmar	has	been	the	missing	link	in	the	region.

125. Jobs created through growth in non-agriculture 
sectors will be especially critical in tackling ur-
ban poverty, particularly through the creation of 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) alongside 
large firms. As	shown	from	the	poverty	profile,	urban	
poverty	 in	 Myanmar	 is	 much	 higher	 than	 originally	
reported.	 Therefore,	 creating	 employment	 opportuni-
ties	 in	 and	 around	 towns	 and	 cities	 will	 be	 critical	 to	
ending	urban	poverty.	Evidence	from	India	shows	that	
urban	 growth	 (particularly	 in	 small	 towns	 to	 which	
rural	 areas	 tend	 to	 be	more	 closely	 linked)	 have	 been	
a	 critical	 driver	 in	 reducing	 rural	 poverty	 as	 well.	As	
policy	 initiatives	 are	 put	 in	 place	 to	 stimulate	 invest-
ments	 by	 large	 foreign	 and	 domestic	 firms,	 it	 will	 be	
important	 to	 create	 a	 conducive	 environment	 for	 the	
urban	poor	 to	set	up	 their	own	businesses,	 in	 the	form	
of	SMEs.	Policy	 initiatives	will	need	 to	 recognize	po-
tential	 synergies	 between	 large	 firms	 and	 SMEs	 that	
can	 be	 critical	 to	 driving	 growth	 and	 creating	 jobs	 –	
SMEs	can	be	major	players	 in	 the	supply	chain	of	 the	
larger	firms	as	suppliers,	consumers,	or	intermediaries.	 

126. For Myanmar to create more jobs in the non-gas 
and non-agricultural sectors, continuing with cur-
rent efforts to open up the space for foreign and 
domestic investors will need to be a priority, com-
plemented by facilitation of access to domestic, 
regional, and international markets. In	 particular,	
the	country	needs	 to	remove	 the	remaining	policy	and	
institutional	impediments	that	are	still	hampering	entry	
by	 new	 domestic	 and	 foreign	 private	 sector	 investors	
into	 the	 economic	 space,	 and	 expansion	 of	 operations	
by	 existing	 investors.	 	 In	 addition,	 there	 is	 also	 need	
to	 remove	 policy	 and	 institutional	 barriers	 to	 domes-
tic,	regional,	and	international	market	access.	Some	of	
the	required	policy	and	 institutional	changes	may	 take	
time	to	be	carried	out	or	may	be	politically	sensitive	but	
many	can	be	implemented	in	the	short	to	medium	term. 

127. In addition to opening up the economic space, at-
tention will also need to focus on removing key con-
straints related to actual factors of production that 
are critical to business start-up and increased pro-
ductivity – such as electricity, finance, land, labor, 
transport connectivity, and ICT. From	 the	2014	 ICA	
enterprise	survey,	most	of	these	featured	highly	as	criti-
cal	constraints	amongst	firms	interviewed	(See	Figure	25	
and	26	below). All	are	expected	to	have	a	high	impact	on	
poverty	reduction	given	their	strong	linkages	to	the	path-
ways	out	of	poverty.	However,	there	is	need	for	careful	
consideration	 in	 determining	 the	 sequencing	 of	 actions	
for	dealing	with	each	of	 the	constraints,	 including	how	
much	 knowledge	 already	 exists	 on	what	 exactly	 needs	
to	be	done,	complexity	of	the	underlying	issues	and	the	
required	 reforms	 to	deal	with	 them,	and	period	of	 time	

World Bank report | 43

over	which	results	on	poverty	reduction	can	be	expected.							

Source: World Bank, Investment Climate Assessment–Enterprise 
Survey, 2014

(a).	 Opening	trade	and	foreign	investment	

128. Due to state dominance and international isola-
tion, Myanmar has not benefited fully from jobs 
created through greater participation by the do-
mestic private sector and foreign direct investment 
(FDI). The	country	has	44	formally	defined	State	Eco-
nomic	Enterprises	(SEEs)	some	of	which	are	operating	

44 | World Bank report

in	 areas	 that	 do	 not	 justify	 public	 sector	 involvement.	
In	 addition,	 SEEs	 have	 an	 unfair	 advantage	 over	 the	
private	 sector	because	 they	enjoy	 significant	 subsidies	
from	 Government.	 Government	 mandates	 requiring	
purchasing	 from	 state	 producers	 where	 possible	 has	
severely	restricted	the	scale	of	public	procurement	and	
sharply	constrained	an	important	driver	of	private	sec-
tor	growth.	Finally,	due	to	the	country’s	past	isolationist	
policies	and	 international	 sanctions,	Myanmar	has	not	
fully	benefited	 from	high	 levels	of	FDI	as	other	coun-
tries	 in	 the	 region.	To	date,	FDI	has	mainly	been	con-
centrated	in	the	extractive	industries.

129. Beyond SEEs, military involvement in businesses 
also casts a heavy cloud on private sector space. 
The	Ministry	of	Defense	owns	two	holding	companies	
with	 vast	 business	 interests:	 The	 Union	 of	 Myanmar	
Economic	Holdings	Limited	(UMEHL)	which	was	es-
tablished	 to	 focus	on	 light	 industries,	 trading,	and	ser-
vices,	and	the	Myanmar	Economic	Corporation	(MEC)	
which	was	established	to	focus	on	heavy	industries.	Al-
though	the	military	owned	companies	are	not	regarded	
as	SEEs,	they	enjoy	certain	privileges	which	make	the	
playing	field	 for	 the	 private	 sector	 uneven.	For	 exam-
ple,	 in	 the	 past	 they	were	 exempted	 from	 commercial	
and	profit	taxes	and	have	had	exclusive	access	to	secure	
preferential	contracts	with	foreign	firms.	

130. In order to create more jobs through increased 
private foreign investment, the Myanmar econo-
my also needs to be more integrated with regional 
and global markets. The	 lifting	 of	 trading	 sanctions	
by	 the	west	and	 the	coming	 into	effect	of	 the	ASEAN	
Economic	Community	(AEC)	in	2015	significantly	ex-
pands	Myanmar’s	 market	 opportunities	 abroad	 which	
could	make	 trade	a	major	driver	of	growth	and	hence,	
job	creation.	 	The	range	of	tariff	rates,	the	average	tar-
iff,	 and	 average	 effective	 rates	 have	 been	 declining	
since	 Myanmar	 became	 a	 member	 of	 the	ASEAN	 in	
1997.	 However,	 the	 country	 still	 has	 many	 non-tariff	
measures	(NTMs)	that	significantly	hamper	integration	
with	 regional	 and	 global	 markets	 although	 efforts	 are	
now	underway	to	streamline	them.	Similarly,	with	few	
exceptions,	 customs	 procedures	 for	 the	 processing	 of	
import	 and	 export	 declarations	 are	 cumbersome.	 The	
Customs Department lacks essential equipment and re-
quires	a	 laboratory	 facility,	possibly	 shared	with	other	
government	 departments,	 that	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 test	
and	quickly	 return	 a	multiplicity	of	 import	 and	 export	
samples.	In	general,	Myanmar	performs	poorly	on	 the	
Logistics	Performance	Index	(See	Figure	25)	compared	
to	most	countries	in	the	region.	

131. Poor transport connectivity is a key constraint to 
Myanmar’s full integration with markets. Cur-
rently,	Myanmar’s	 transport	 infrastructure	 lags	behind	
most	of	its	peers	in	the	region.	For	example,	according	
to	 an	ADB	 report	 (2014),	 the	 total	 road	network	 as	of	
2012	 was	 148,	 600	 kilometers.	 However,	 considering	
its	 size	 (676,577	 square	kilometers)	and	population	of	
51	million,	the	country’s	total	road	length	is	considered	

low	and	in	terms	of	road	density	(219.8	kilometers	per	
1,000	square	kilometers),	it	is	the	second	lowest	among	
ASEAN	countries.	The	road	network	had	expanded	at	
a	rate	of	about	8,600	kilometers	of	new	roads	per	year	
between	 2005-2008.	This	 slowed	 down	 to	 5,800	 kilo-
meters	of	additional	roads	per	year	from	2009	to	2012.	
Similarly,	 Myanmar’s	 port	 infrastructure	 lags	 behind	
its	 peers.	 The	 country’s	 Liner	 Shipping	 Connectivity	
Index37	 is	 at	 par	 with	 Cambodia	 but	 lower	 than	 other	
Southeast	Asian	countries.	Railway	and	river	transport	
networks	also	are	relatively	underdeveloped	compared	
to	peers	in	the	region.

37 

 The LSCI measures how	well	countries	are	connected	to	global	ship-
ping	networks.	It	is	computed	by	the	United	Nations	Conference	on	Trade	and	De-
velopment	(UNCTAD)	based	on	five	components	of	the	maritime	transport	sector:	
number	of	ships,	their	container-carrying	capacity,	maximum	vessel	size,	number	of	
services,	and	number	of	companies	that	deploy	container	ships	in	a	country’s	ports.

(b).	Increasing	agricultural	productivity

132. With the slow creation of non-farm jobs, agricul-
ture will continue to employ many people in Myan-
mar for years to come and therefore play a critical 
role in reducing poverty in the country. Increasing	
agricultural	 profitability	 and	 returns	 to	 labor	 will	 be	
central	 	 for	 effective	 poverty	 reduction.	Higher	 profit-
ability,	 due	 to	 increasing	 yields,	 shifting	 or	 diversify-
ing	 cropping	 or	 livestock	 holding	 patterns,	 and	 more	
efficient	use	of	inputs	(including	labor),	is	a	necessary	
condition	to	increase	farm	welfare.	There	is	likely	to	be	
some	 substitution	 of	 capital	 for	 labor,	 although	 incre-
mental	farm	mechanization	will	enable	increased	utili-
zation	of	spare	land	in	some	areas	and	generate	demand	
for	 off-farm	 service	 provisioning.	A	 more	 productive	
agriculture	would	also	encourage	 job	creation	 through	
agro-processing	 and	 food	 distribution	 activities	 and	
earn	foreign	exchange	through	exports.

133. Poor rice yields are the main reason behind low 
agricultural productivity in Myanmar. This	 is	 be-
cause	rice	is	the	main	agricultural	product	in	Myanmar,	
covering	 about	 60	 percent	 of	 the	 country’s	 total	 culti-
vated	 land	 area.	 Rice	 also	 accounts	 for	 97	 percent	 of	
total	food	grain	production	by	weight	and	is	one	of	the	
country’s	major	exports.	Although	official	data	seem	to	
suggest	that	rice	yields	in	Myanmar	are	comparable	to	
other	countries	in	the	region,	a	closer	scrutiny	shows	a	
much	larger	gap	(Box	5).	The	most	acute	problems	be-
hind	low	rice	productivity	are	at	the	farm	level,	mainly	
inefficient	 irrigation,	 lack	 of	 access	 to	 extension	 ser-
vices,	and	poor	production	practices.

World Bank report | 45

Box 5: Comparing Myanmar’s rice yield data 
with other countries in the region

The	official	statistics	of	the	Ministry	of	Agriculture	and	
Irrigation	 (MOAI)	 place	 average	 paddy	 yields	 at	 4.0	
tons	 per	 hectare,	 yet	 this	 results	 in	 an	 estimated	 lev-
el	 of	 rice	 production	 far	 in	 excess	 of	what	 is	 consid-
ered	to	be	consumed	in	or	traded	from	Myanmar.	The	
United	States	Department	of	Agriculture	(USDA)	has	
estimated	that	average	paddy	yields	were	2.5	tons	per	
hectare	 over	 the	 2010-2012	 period.	This	would	 place	
productivity	levels	near	the	bottom	for	Southeast	Asia,	
above	 only	 Cambodia	 (Figure	 26).	 The	 recent	 large	
sample	farm	survey	conducted	by	the	World	Bank	and	
LIFT	 found	the	average	2013	wet	season	yields	to	be	
2.4	tons	per	hectare	in	Sagaing,	2.8	tons	per	hectare	in	
Ayeyarwaddy,	and	3.0	tons	per	hectare	in	Bago.	Those	
three	areas	account	for	the	bulk	of	Myanmar’s	rice	pro-
duction.	

The	yield	gap	of	Myanmar	is	large.		Its	varietal	mix	is	
more	comparable	with	the	Central	region	of	Thailand,	
Indonesia,	Philippines,	and	Vietnam	than	with	Cambo-
dia,	Lao	PDR,	 and	 the	Northeast	of	Thailand.	A	 large	
proportion	of	Cambodian,	Lao	and	Thailand’s	rice	pro-
duction	 is	 of	 high-value	 jasmine,	 aromatic	 and	 gluti-
nous	varieties,	which	inherently	have	lower	yields	than	
conventional	varieties.	For	example,	in	the	Northeast	of	
Thailand	(where	nearly	all	the	jasmine	is	grown,	along	
with	glutinous	varieties),	the	average	yield	of	main	crop	
is	 2.3	 tons	 per	 hectare.	The	more	 suitable	 comparator	
with	 Myanmar	 is	 the	 wet	 season	 crop	 in	 Thailand’s	
Central	region	where	conventional	varieties	dominate.	
The	average	yields	there	were	3.8	tons	per	hectare	over	
the	2011-2013	period.	This	would	 imply	a	 ‘yield	gap’	
of	some	58	percent	for	Sagaing,	36	percent	for	Ayeyar-
waddy,	and	27	percent	in	Bago.	Paddy	yields	in	some	
of	the	better	growing	areas	in	Vietnam’s	Mekong	Delta	
region	range	between	6	and	7.5	tons	per	hectare,	imply-
ing	even	potentially	larger	yield	gap	in	Myanmar.	

 
46 | World Bank report

134. At the same time, over-dependence on rice means 
that Myanmar has been unable to increase overall 
agricultural productivity through diversification 
or alternative patterns of specialization. The	Gov-
ernment	has	over	the	years	emphasized	food	self-suffi-
ciency	 through	 rice	 production,	 and,	 for	 considerable	
periods,	actually	directed	farmers	to	grow	rice	in	order	
to	meet	fixed	production	targets.	Opportunities	to	grow	
other	cereals,	for	food	or	feed,	were	generally	neglected. 
As	can	be	seen	from	Figure	30,	Myanmar,	rice	has	ac-
counted	 for	 nearly	 94	 percent	 of	 total	 cereals	 produc-
tion	 value,	 a	 much	 higher	 proportion	 than	 for	 several	
comparator	countries.	Significant	growth	opportunities	
also	 exist	 for	 higher	 value	 agro-food	 commodities,	 as	
evidenced	by	 the	 recent	 emergence	of	 a	very	 substan-
tial	 regional	 trade	 in	 beans,	 pulses	 and	 horticultural	
products.	 Domestic	 consumption	 of	 animal	 products	
is	 expected	 to	 increase,	 sharply,	 with	 rising	 incomes.		
Myanmar	 will	 therefore	 need	 to	 diversify	 away	 from	
rice	if	the	country’s	agricultural	potential	is	to	be	fully	
realized.	

135. In addition, an inefficient milling industry produc-
es low quality processed rice. The	 majority	 of	 rice	
mills	 in	 Myanmar	 employ	 antiquated	 technology,	 re-
sulting	 in	 lower	 technical	 efficiency,	 higher	 levels	 of	
product	 loss,	 and	 a	 low	 quality	milled	 rice	 product.	 It	
is	 estimated	 that	 less	 than	 one-fourth	 of	 the	 mills	 are	
capable	of	producing	medium-to-high	quality	rice.	This	
situation	 limits	 the	 market	 segments	 which	 Myanmar	
can	 supply	 abroad,	 leads	 to	 relatively	 low	 unit	 values	
for	rice	exports,	and	results	in	low	prices	paid	to	farm-
ers.	Historical	factors—including	periodic	or	sustained	
bans	on	rice	exports	and	heavy	state	enterprise	involve-
ment	 in	 the	 trade—inhibited	private	 investment	 in	 the	
sector.	Policy	uncertainties	continue	to	deter	some	po-
tential	investors.

136. Finally, lack of access to land and tenure security 
are also a critical constraint to agriculture produc-
tivity, and private sector investment more broadly. 
Myanmar	 has	 the	 highest	 rate	 of	 landlessness	 in	 East	
Asia,	estimated	at	between	one-third	and	forty	percent	
of	the	rural	population.	At	the	same	time,	most	people	
with	land	are	unsure	of	long	term	tenure	security	due	to	
a	 history	 of	widespread	 land	 grabs.	 Evidence	 in	 other	
countries	has	shown	that	secure	land	tenure	can	be	crit-
ical	 to	 increased	 agriculture	 investment,	 and	 therefore	
increased	incomes.	More	broadly,	lack	of	access	to	land	
and	tenure	security	has	also	been	identified	as	a	critical	
constraint	 to	 businesses.	According	 to	 the	 findings	 of	
the	 ICA	 enterprise	 survey,	 this	 is	 particularly	 a	 prob-
lem	amongst	medium,	small,	and	micro	enterprises	but	
not	so	much	amongst	large	enterprises	(Refer	to	earlier	
Figure	25	and	26).	The	ICA	further	finds	that	access	to	
land	 is	a	key	obstacle	across	all	 sectors	–	manufactur-
ing,	retail,	and	services.		

137. Some progress has been made recently to improve 
tenure security but land conflicts persist due to un-
clear rules for land acquisition and compensation 

and weaknesses in the institutional framework for 
handling disputes. Since	 the	 transition	 began,	 two	
land	 laws	 have	 been	 enacted	 which	 aim	 to	 improve	
land	 property	 rights.	 These	 are	 the	 Farm	 Land	 Law	
(2012)	and	the	Vacant,	Fallow,	and	Virgin	(VFV)	Lands	
Management	 Law	 (2012).	Together,	 the	 two	 laws	 en-
able	 farmers	 to	 acquire	 formal	 land	 use	 rights	 and	 in-
clude	provisions	that	recognize	and	respect	existing	use	
of	land	by	farmers,	even	if	there	has	previously	been	no	
recognition	 of	 the	 use	 by	 the	 Government.	 However,	
in	spite	of	these	new	laws,	acquisitions	and	compensa-
tions	are	still	being	governed	by	the	1894	Land	Acqui-
sition	Act.	Lack	of	clarity	in	procedures	and	provisions	
in	this	Law	has	led	to	arbitrariness	in	decisions,	result-
ing	 in	 conflicts.	 To	 compound	 the	 situation,	 there	 are	
significant	 weaknesses	 in	 the	 institutional	 framework	
for	 handling	 land	 disputes. Recently,	Government	 has	
set	up	a	Land	Loss	Enquiry	Commission	of	Parliament	
to	 investigate	 claims	 of	 land	 confiscation	 by	 the	mili-
tary	during	2008	and	2011.	

138. Given the critical nature of land in investment de-
cisions on and off-farm, improved access to land 
and improved land tenure security will have a 
significant impact on job creation and increased 
returns to investment in Myanmar, and hence, 
on poverty reduction. There	 are	 opportunities	 for	
Myanmar	 to	 learn	 from	 the	 experiences	 of	 other	
countries	 in	moving	 forward	with	 land	 reforms.	 For	
example,	 land	 consolidation38 and land acquisition 
processes	 in	 Myanmar	 have	 so	 far	 been	 practiced	
as	 land	 readjustment	 procedures	 of	 technical	 nature	
and	not	as	 land	 right	altering	processes	according	 to	
international	 practices. The	 experience	 from	 other	
countries	 shows	 that	 such	 reforms	can	be	 successful	
if	 they	 are	 anchored	 in	 proper	 and	 enforceable	 legal	
frameworks,	 and	 are	 based	 on	 inclusive	 and	 trans-
parent	 processes,	 which	 include	 community	 aware-
ness	 raising	 and	 consultations	 at	 various	 stages	 of	
the	process. 

(c).	 Improving	Myanmar’s	overall	productive	efficiency	and	
competiveness		

139. For Myanmar’s products to be competitive inter-
nationally, there is need to deal with constraints 
currently hampering the economy’s overall pro-
ductive efficiency, mainly critical shortages in pow-
er, under-developed financial sector, shortages in 
skilled labor, and low supply of ICT services. Poor	
polices	 and	 long	 period	 of	 isolation	 have	 led	 to	 criti-
cal	 shortages	 of	 these	 key	 factors	 of	 production,	 lead-
ing	 to	high	costs	of	opening	and	operating	businesses.	
Unless	 these	 constraints	 are	 removed,	 the	 potential	 of	
the	country’s	dual	shift	to	create	more	jobs	through	in-

38 
 Land consolidation has been a process where farmers with ad-
jacent plots have been asked to combine them in order to make the farms 
amenable to mechanized commercial agriculture. Once combined, the land 
has usually been operated by large corporations on a concession basis, with 
the owners of the land supplying labor. Such arrangements have resulted in 
disputes due to lack of clarity about the terms of the agreement.

creased	private	sector	investment	and	trade	will	not	be	
fully	maximized.

140. Inadequate power is a particularly critical con-
straint to existing and potential business activities 
in Myanmar (See Figures 31 and 32). Due to ad-
vances	 in	 technology,	 most	 production	 and	 non-pro-
duction	 processes	 depend	 heavily	 on	 power,	 whether	
in	the	manufacturing	or	service	industries.	But	as	men-
tioned	earlier,	Myanmar	has	one	of	the	lowest	rates	of	
electrification	 in	 Southeast	 Asia	 with	 connectivity	 to	
the	public	grid	at	less	than	30	percent	while	overall	ac-
cess	to	electricity	(including	private	generators)	at	48.8	
percent.

World Bank report | 47

141. Similarly, the country’s financial sector has large-
ly been underdeveloped, with less than 20 percent 
of the population having access to formal financial 
services (See Figures 33 and 34). Not	surprising,	ac-
cess	 to	 finance	 was	 mentioned	 as	 a	 major	 obstacle	 to	
doing	 business	 in	Myanmar	 by	most	 firms	 during	 the	
ICA	Enterprise	Survey	(Refer	to	earlier	Figures	25	and	
26).	 The	 banking	 industry	 is	 beset	 with	 cumbersome	
banking	 requirements	and	high	 transactions	costs,	and	
lacks	 depth	 in	 the	 provision	 of	 financial	 services.	 For	
example,	 it	 is	 currently	not	 easy	 to	 transfer	 funds	 into	
or	out	of	Myanmar.	Migrants	do	not	have	access	to	ap-
propriate	 financial	 services	 for	 them	 to	 remit	 foreign	
earnings	back	to	their	families.	Access	to	loans	is	ham-
pered	 by	 stringent	 collateral	 requirements	 while	 most	
banks	do	not	offer	credit	card	services.	In	addition,	in-
terest	rates	are	administratively	controlled	which	limits	
profitability	of	banks	and	hence	 their	ability	 to	extend	
credit.	

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

48 | World Bank report

142. Low supply of skilled labor is another key con-
straint mentioned by most investors in Myanmar. 
Since	 the	 country	 is	 emerging	 from	 a	 long	 period	 of	
isolation,	 there	 is	 a	 significant	 gap	 between	 locally	
available	skills	and	the	skills	demanded	by	employers,	
particularly	 foreign	 companies	 just	 coming	 in.	 Apart	
from	sector	specific	technical	skills,	many	people	who	
have	graduated	from	schools	within	Myanmar	also	lack	
basic	proficiency	 in	 the	English	 language.	 In	addition,	
most	institutions	offering	vocational	and	technical	edu-
cation	schools	were	converted	 into	formal	universities	
under	 military	 rule.	 	 Given	 the	 current	 wide	 gap,	 in-
creasing	the	supply	of	skilled	labor	force	would	there-
fore	have	a	high	impact	on	poverty	reduction.	

143. However, more sustainable actions to increase the 
supply of skilled labor will take time to show re-
sults, hence the need for some necessary actions 
to start being implemented in the short-term. As 
a	 stop-gap	 measure	 for	 filling	 the	 skills	 gap,	 the	 For-
eign	 Investment	 Law	 currently	 allows	 companies	 to	
hire	foreigners,	initially	up	to	75	percent	in	the	first	two	
years,	 then	 declining	 over	 the	 years.	However,	 a	 long	
term	solution	lies	in	the	ability	of	the	education	system	
to	 produce	 enough	 numbers	 of	 people	 with	 the	 skills	
required	in	the	market.	This	will	take	time	to	be	imple-
mented	 and	 to	 yield	 results	 therefore	 some	 small	 but	
critical	actions	need	to	start	now.	In	particular,	there	is	
need	to	determine	the	nature	of	the	skills	in	short	sup-
ply	and	come	up	with	policies	that	will	ensure	that	the	
public	and	private	sectors	are	able	to	make	and	expand	
investments	 in	 areas	 that	 will	 meet	 employers’	 long-
term	skills	needs.

Source: World Development Indicators, 2014

144. ICT in Myanmar is significantly underdeveloped 
compared to other countries in the region and in 
the world, although the situation is now expected 
to improve rapidly. The	 most	 recent	 international-
ly	 comparable	 data	 (WDI	 2014),	 subject	 to	 the	 wide	
margins	of	 error	 for	 the	underlying	data	 for	Myanmar	
(see	Box	3)	indicate	very	low	mobile	phone	and	inter-
net	 penetration	 rates	 of	 1.1	 percent	 	 and	 0.3	 percent,	
respectively	 (Figures	 35	 and	 36).	 However,	 telecom-
munication	sector	reforms	are	taking	place	with	the	lib-
eralization	of	the	market.	 	A	new	Telecommunications	
Law	 was	 approved	 in	 October	 2013	 and	 it	 is	 largely	
in	 line	 with	 good	 practice.	 	 Two	 new	 operators	 have	
been	 licensed	 through	 an	 internationally	 recognized	
transparent	process	and	the	incumbent	state	owned	op-
erator	will	 soon	 select	 an	 operating	 partner.	Myanmar	
will	 transition	 from	 a	 monopoly	 market	 into	 a	 multi	
operator	environment.	 	Key	 secondary	 legislation	was	
also	 developed	 through	 a	 public	 consultation	 process	
and	other	issues	are	being	addressed	in	the	next	phase.

145. Improving the supply of ICT services will have a 
high impact on poverty reduction by creating jobs, 
enhancing productivity, and improving access to 
information, markets, and services, hence the need 
to build on the significant progress already made 
by Myanmar so far. Given	 its	 many	 applications,	
ICT	 has	 great	 potential	 for	 transforming	 Myanmar’s	
economy	 and	 people’s	 lives.	As	 experienced	 in	 more	
advanced	 economies,	 improved	 ICT	 can	 help	 create	
jobs	 through,	 for	 example,	 the	 emergence	of	new	val-
ue	 chains	 that	 provide	 online	 work	 opportunities	 for	
unskilled	 to	 higher	 skilled	 workers	 from	 anywhere	 in	
the	world,	as	long	as	they	have	computers	and	internet	
access.	In	addition,	it	can	help	increase	returns	through	
use	 of	 more	 efficient	 ICT-based	 production	 and	 mar-
keting	 applications	 and	 communication.	 Finally,	 pub-
lic	 service	 delivery	 could	 be	 improved	 significantly	
in	 terms	of	quality,	 timeliness	and	 reach	by	 taking	ad-
vantage	 of	 the	 expected	 steep	 increase	 of	 internet	 and	
mobile	penetration.	Given	 these	potential	benefits,	 the	

  
country	will	 now	 need	 to	 build	 on	 the	 progress	 it	 has	
made	of	opening	up	the	ICT	market	to	competition.	In	
particular,	 there	 is	 need	 to	 provide	 an	 enabling	 regu-
latory	 and	 policy	 environment	 for	 the	 country	 to	 start	
participating	in	the	global	online/virtual	work	opportu-
nity.	 In	 addition,	mobile	 and	 e-Government	 platforms	
and services need to be developed in order to improve 
efficiency	and	reach	in	the	delivery	of	services.	

(d).	Ensuring	sustainability	through	improved	and	more	inte-
grated	environmental	and	natural	resource	management

146. Myanmar’s ability to sustainably reduce poverty 
will depend on its capacity to properly manage the 
environment and its vast natural resource endow-
ments. The	country	relies	heavily	on	natural	resources	
for	 its	 productive	 economic	 activities	 that	 are	 critical	
to	 job	 creation	 including	 agriculture,	mining,	 tourism,	
transportation,	and	power	generation.	Therefore,	to	en-
sure	sustainability	in	the	reduction	of	poverty,	the	coun-
try	needs	 to	build	effective	 institutions	and	 implement	
reforms	 that	 are	 integrated	 into	 Myanmar’s	 environ-
ment	and	natural	resource	sector.  

147. Hydropower is a major natural resource for Myan-
mar. Hydropower	 investments	 carry	 a	 great	 potential	
to	contribute	 to	poverty	 reduction	and	 shared	prosper-
ity	 if	 they	are	well	executed,	with	benefits	accruing	 to	
the	population	at	large,	but	they	also	carry	huge	risks	if	
environmental and social considerations are not prop-
erly	integrated	in	an	optimal	hydropower	development	
program.	 	 Currently,	 hydropower	 accounts	 for	 about	
75%	 of	 electricity	 production	 in	 the	 country.	 	 Many	
new	 projects	 are	 at	 different	 stages	 of	 development	
(58	 projects	 totaling	 about	 45GW,	 according	 to	ADB	
and	JICA	draft	master	plans	for	the	power	sector),	only	
some	 of	 which	 are	 likely	 to	 be	 developed	 in	 the	 next	
5-10	years.	 	To	 realize	 the	potential	benefits	of	hydro-
power,	Myanmar	will	depend	on	substantially	strength-
ened	government	capacity	for	sustainable	hydropower	
planning,	in	order	to	identify	and	prioritize	the	projects	
with	 the	 highest	 impact	 for	 development	 and	 poverty	
reduction.	 Donors	 support	 for	 institutional	 develop-
ment	and	capacity	building	(currently	 led	by	 the	Gov-
ernment	 of	 Norway)	 and	 participation	 of	 experienced	
private sector developers are essential for sustainable 
development	of	hydropower	in	Myanmar.

148. Critical to ensuring environmental sustainability 
is the integrated management of the Ayeyarwad-
dy river basin, which is central to Myanmar’s ca-
pacity to exploit its full growth and development 
potential. The	Ayeyarwaddy	 river	 basin	 has	 been	 de-
scribed	as	the	heart	of	the	nation,	accounting	for	about	
60	percent	of	Myanmar’s	landmass,	and	home	to	some	
70	percent	of	its	population.		It	is	a	river	of	global	pro-
portions,	with	an	average	annual	flow	of	over	400	bil-
lion	cubic	meters,	equivalent	 to	 roughly	85	percent	of	
the	 Mekong.39	 	 Many	 of	 the	 opportunities	 considered	

39 
 Annual volumes of the Ayeyarwaddy (410 bcm) and the Mekong 
(475 bcm) are as reported by the Government of Myanmar and the Mekong 

World Bank report | 49

most	 promising	 for	Myanmar’s	 growth	 relate	 directly	
to	water,	and	particularly	the	Ayeyarwaddy,	such	as	en-
hanced	 production	 and	 trade	 in	 agricultural	 products,	
hydropower	generation,40	and	the	expansion	of	nation-
al	 and	 regional	 green	 transport	 systems	 via	 rivers	 and	
ports.		

149. A fragmented approach to the management of the 
river basin has been a major risk to sustainable 
growth and development in Myanmar, but efforts 
are now underway to address this problem. Due 
to	 institutional	 weaknesses	 in	 the	 public	 sector,	 eco-
nomic	 activities	 in	 the	 river	 basin	 have	 proceeded	 in	
a	 fragmented	manner	 and	without	 taking	 into	 account	
their	 long-term	 impact	 on	 sustainability.	 To	 address	
the	 broad	 inter-related	 risks	 and	 opportunities	 of	 the	
Ayeyarwaddy	River,	as	well	as	to	address	the	fragmen-
tations	among	the	national	water	resources	agencies,	a	
National	 Water	 Resources	 Committee	 (NWRC)	 was	
established	by	Presidential	decree	in	July	2013.		In	ad-
dition,	 the	World	 Bank	 plans	 to	 provide	 financial	 and	
technical	 assistance	 to	 the	 Government	 of	 Myanmar	
that	 will	 help	 rationalize	 and	 strengthen	 public	 sector	
institutions	 for	 an	 integrated	 approach	 to	 the	manage-
ment	of	economic	activities	and	projects	in	the	river	ba-
sin,	 particularly	 large-scale	 infrastructure	 investments	
in	 agriculture,	 hydropower,	 navigation,	municipal	 and	
industrial	water	supply	and	wastewater	treatment.

150. More broadly, sound management of natural re-
sources and the broader environment will be im-
portant to sustain economic growth and reduce 
poverty rates in Myanmar. Apart	 from	 the	Ayeyar-
waddy	 river,	Myanmar	 is	 also	 rich	 in	 natural	 gas,	 has	
sizeable	oil	reserves,	and	significant	mineral	resources	
(ADB,	 2012a).	 These	 have	 been	 among	 Myanmar’s	
growth	 sectors,	 registering	 an	 annual	 growth	 rate	 of	
15.5	 percent	 during	 2001-2006	 (ADB,	 2012b).	At	 the	
same	 time,	 without	 adequate	 safeguards,	 policies	 and	
regulations	 in	 place	 and	 capacity	 to	 implement	 them,	
these	activities	can	lead	to	irreversible	eco-system	deg-
radation,	 deforestation,	 and	 water	 and	 air	 pollution.	
Poor	 communities	 that	 depend	 on	 forests	 for	 wood	
and	 non-wood	 forest	 products	 and	 use	 drinking	 wa-
ter	 from	 contaminated	 wells	 would	 be	 affected	 most	
by	 such	 environmental	 impacts.	A	 significant	 propor-
tion	 of	 natural	 resource	 extraction	 has	 taken	 place	 in	
ethnic	minority	 areas	 and	 poor	 sector	 governance	 has	
fueled	conflicts	between	armed	groups	and	 the	central	
Government,	contributing	to	long-term	poverty	and	un-
der-development.

River Commission, respectively.  Recent literature (Robinson et al. 2007) 
suggests the Ayeyarwaddy’s volume may be even higher, in the range of 420 
to 440 billion cubic meters (+/- 48 bcm).   

40 
 In total, Myanmar has an estimated 100,000 MW of total 
hydropower resources. Of this, the Ayeyarwaddy River alone is believed to 
account for 38,000 MW of potential installed capacity.  The total installed 
capacity of existing hydropower plants is 2,660 MW.

50 | World Bank report

151. The development of a nationally agreed Environ-
mental and Social Safeguards framework that is 
based on best practices will be critical to ensuring 
that investments in the various intervention areas 
proceed in a manner that is consistent with long-
term environmental sustainability. A	 key	 opportu-
nity	 arises	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 is	 wide	 awareness	
amongst	stakeholders	 in	Myanmar,	within	and	outside	
Government,	 about	 the	 need	 for	 environmentally	 res- 
ponsible	 investments.	At	 the	same	 time,	 there	 is	a	risk	
that	planned	 investments	 could	 face	 significant	delays	
unless	there	is	evidence	that	they	have	passed	environ-
mental	and	social	impact	assessments	that	are	based	on	
a	 nationally	 agreed	 framework.	 Therefore,	 a	 key	 pri-
ority	 going	 forward	 is	 the	 preparation	 of	 a	 nationally	
agreed	framework	for	Environmental	and	Social	Safe-
guards.	

152. Similarly, Myanmar does not have a well-functioning 
framework for the management of natural resource 
revenues that ensures long-term sustainability of 
development. As	 already	 mentioned,	 natural	 resource	
revenues	 are	 the	 dominant	 source	 of	 public	 revenues	
in	 Myanmar,	 and	 are	 set	 to	 increase	 with	 new	 gas	
field	 coming	 on	 stream	 and	 significant	 scale	 up	 of	 oil	
production	 planned.	 Experience	 from	 other	 countries	
shows	 that	 these	 natural	 resource	 revenues	 can	 be	
volatile,	 as	 demand	 and	 prices	 are	 subject	 to	 global	
political	 and	 economic	 events.	 In	 addition,	 given	 that	
natural	 resources	 are	 finite,	 there	 is	 need	 to	 ensure	
that	 the	 management	 of	 natural	 resources	 also	 caters	
for	 future	 generations.	 Unless	 there	 is	 an	 appropriate	
framework,	volatility	 in	natural	 resource	 revenues	can	
lead	to	unwarranted	volatility	in	expenditure.	Similarly,	
imprudent	 use	 of	 natural	 resource	 revenues	 threatens	
the	 sustainability	 of	 development	 beyond	 the	 current	
generation.	 Currently,	 Myanmar	 does	 not	 have	 any	
framework	 for	 managing	 the	 volatility	 of	 natural	 re-
source	 revenues	 that	 promotes	 the	 build-up	 of	 fiscal	
buffers	 through	 saving	 in	 good	 years	 that	 can	 then	 be	
spent	prudently	over	the	medium	term,	or	for	ensuring	
savings	for	future	generations.	

153. The management of natural resource revenues is 
also seen to lack in transparency, accountability, 
and fairness, although progress is being made to 
enhance transparency of natural resource reve-
nues. There	 is	general	been	 lack	of	publicly	available	
information	about	contracting	arrangements,	payments	
made	by	companies,	volumes	of	revenues	received,	and	
destination	of	 revenues	and	extent	 to	which	 revenues	
are	 included	 in	budget.	In	addition,	a	 large	portion	of	
potential	revenues	is	currently	not	captured	–	Myanmar 
is	the	world’s	leading	producer	of	jade,	sapphires,	and	
rubies.	 Data	 on	 the	 gems	 trade	 is	 very	 limited,	 with	
poor	accounting	and	reporting	of	sales	and	a	very	large	
proportion	 of	 sales	 going	 through	 unregulated	 border	
trade.	 Finally,	 many	 of	 Myanmar’s	 natural	 resources	
are	 concentrated	 in	 the	 ethnic	 minority	 states	 and	 re-
gions,	home	 to	 the	world’s	 longest	running	civil	wars,	
and	 have	 fueled	 generations	 of	 conflict.	 Progress	 has	

recently	 been	 made	 to	 improve	 transparency	 and	 ac-
countability	 through	 the	 EITI	 process	 -	 Myanmar	 re-
cently	attained	EITI	candidacy	status,41		but	more	work	
remains	 especially	 in	 ensuring	 that	 states	 and	 regions	
from	 which	 resources	 are	 extracted	 feel	 that	 there	 is	
fairness	 in	 the	manner	 in	which	natural	resource	reve-
nues	are	allocated	across	the	country.

154. Given the growing rate of urbanization and high 
levels of urban poverty in Myanmar, it will also 
be important to ensure that urban development 
proceeds in a sustainable manner. In	response	to	the	
reforms,	most	new	 investments	coming	 into	 the	coun-
try	 are	 locating	 in	 the	 country’s	main	 cities	 and	 other	
urban areas since infrastructure and services are rela-
tively	better	than	in	rural	areas.	Similarly,	most	people	
looking	for	jobs	are	flocking	to	towns	and	cities.	Rapid 
industrialization	 and	 urban	 population	 growth	 are	
therefore	 putting	 pressure	 on	 the	 country’s	 cities	 and	
its	 environment.	 Data	 on	 the	 rate	 of	 urbanization	 are	
not	available	although	anecdotal	evidence	suggests	that	
it	is	high.	

155. Promoting sustainable urban development will be 
a complex and long-term agenda, but some critical 
first steps could be taken to lay the foundation for 
the future. In	 particular,	 it	 is	 important	 for	Myanmar	
to	start	investing	in	proper	urban	planning	and	strength-
ening	policies	and	institutions	for	sustainable	urban	de-
velopment.	The	goal	should	be	to	ensure	that	cities	and	
other	urban	areas	continue	to	function	at	levels	of	quality 
of	life	desired	by	the	community	without	restricting	the	
options	available	 to	 the	present	and	future	generations	
and	causing	adverse	impacts	inside	and	outside	the	ur-
ban	boundaries.	In	the	medium-term,	the	development	
of	Special	Economic	Zones	will	ensure	that	industriali- 
zation	proceeds	in	a	more	systematic	manner	and	without 
putting	pressure	on	cities	and	towns.

41 
 This means that the International Board of the EITI confirmed 
that Myanmar has, amongst others, successfully put in place a Multi-Stake-
holder Group comprising representatives from  government, civil society 
and operators. As an EITI Candidate country, Myanmar is now required to 
publicly disclose a range of information about its extractive industries in 
an annual EITI Report. This includes payment and revenue data, produc-
tion data as well as information about how licenses are allocated, who the 
license holders are and other contextual information about the extractive 
industries. Myanmar has 18 months to produce its first EITI Report.

IV. KnoWLEDgE gAPS, IMPLICATIonS,
AnD PRoPoSPED AnALYTICAL
WoRK AgEnDA 

52 | World Bank report

156. In spite of best efforts, knowledge and data gaps 
have imposed limitations on some of the analyses 
in the SCD. Going	 forward,	 a	 number	 of	 knowledge	
gaps	 have	 been	 identified	 in	 various	 areas,	 together	
with	 current	 plans	 and	 future	 options	 for	 filling	 these	
gaps	 (See	 Table	A.1	 in	 the	Annex).	 This	 list	 is	 by	 no	
means	exhaustive	but	provides	pointers	to	critical	areas	
where	future	analytical	work	may	need	to	focus	on.		

157. Data constraints have limited the poverty analytics 
in this SCD. In	 particular,	 it	 has	 not	 been	 possible	 to	
assess	how	poverty	has	changed	in	Myanmar	since	the	
2009/10	 IHLCA	 survey	 was	 conducted.	 In	 addition,	
there	is	still	no	clear	understanding	of	some	aspects	of	
poverty	and	of	 local	context	 in	conflict	affected	areas.	
Going	 forward,	 the	 Bank	 plans	 to	 undertake	 a	Myan-
mar	 Poverty	 and	Living	Conditions	 Survey	 (MPLCS)	
in	2014/15	 that	will	aim	 to	quickly	provide	up-to-date	
and	 credible	 estimates	 of	 poverty,	 and	 to	 inform	 the	
design	 and	 implementation	 of	 the	 large-scale	 (18,000	
households)	 national	 survey	 that	 the	 government	 is	
planning	to	undertake	in	2015.	It	is	hoped	that	the	next	
surveys	will	be	able	to	cover	the	border	areas	that	have	
not	been	properly	represented	in	previous	surveys.	This	
will	need	to	be	complemented	by	targeted	studies	to	un-
derstand	better	the	local	context	of	the	social,	political,	
and	 economic	 issues	 in	 the	 conflict-affected	 minority	
areas.	

158. Similarly, lack of data has hampered analyses of 
unemployment and the job market in Myanmar. 
There	 are	 currently	 no	 recent	 and	 credible	 unemploy-
ment	 figures,	 labor	 income	 trends,	 migration	 patterns	
within	and	beyond	Myanmar,	and	returns	to	education.	
The	 last	 labor	 force	 survey	 was	 conducted	 in	 1990.	
The	 Ministry	 of	 Labor	 recently	 signed	 an	 agreement	
with	 the	 International	 Labor	 Organization	 to	 conduct	
a	 new	 labor	 force	 survey.	 In	 addition,	 there	 has	 not	
been	a	comprehensive	analysis	of	the	labor	intensity	of	
various	sectors.	As	a	result,	it	has	not	been	possible	to	
assess	 in	 empirical	 terms	 the	 potential	 contribution	 of	
various	 sectors	 to	 job	 creation.	 	 On	 the	 demand	 side,	
there	 is	 also	 lack	 of	more	 comprehensive	 information	
on	 the	 type	 of	 skills	 on	 demand	 in	 the	 market	 or	 by	
potential	entrants	to	the	market	would	be	useful	to	help	
in	the	design	of	programs	aimed	at	filling	the	skills	gap.	
The	design	of	such	program	would	need	to	be	informed	
by	 an	 assessment	 of	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 existing	 pro-
grams	for	increasing	the	supply	of	skills	in	the	market.	
Finally,	 due	 to	 the	 expected	 role	 that	 ICT	 is	 likely	 to	
play	in	creating	jobs	in	Myanmar,	an	in-depth	study	on	
ICT	 and	 the	 jobs	 agenda	 would	 be	 warranted	 beyond	
the	Ericsson	Study	on	the	potential	economic	impact	of	
mobile	communications	in	Myanmar.	

159. In addition, it has not been possible in some cases 
to fully understand the scale of certain develop-
ment challenges. Detailed and more robust macroeco-
nomic	 analysis	 has	 not	 been	 possible	 due	 to	 the	 lack	
of	credible	national	accounts	data.	Planned	support	by	
the	ADB	to	update	the	SNA	will	help	address	this	chal-

lenge.	 Similarly,	 while	 it	 is	 generally	 understood	 that	
more	 broadly,	 there	 are	weaknesses	 in	 the	 capacity	 of	
the	public	sector	to	design,	coordinate,	and	deliver	ser-
vices,	 there	 is	need	 for	a	more	 in-depth	understanding	
of	the	critical	capacity	constraints	within	each	sector.	It	
would	also	be	useful	to	understand	the	impact	of	poli-
tics	in	decision	making	within	the	country’s	bureaucra-
cy.	To	fill	these	gaps,	there	is	need	to	conduct	a	compre-
hensive	public-sector	assessment.

160. On service delivery, knowledge gaps exist in the 
area of outcomes and government performance, 
particularly in hard-to-reach areas; and potential 
of private sector participation in the provision of 
public goods. For	example,	in	education,	there	is	cur-
rently	 no	 national	 assessment	 of	 learning	 outcomes	 at	
the	lower	levels	of	basic	education.	As	a	result,	no	one	
knows	 how	 much	 learning	 actually	 occurs	 at	 differ-
ent	 levels	 of	 basic	 education.	 Going	 forward,	 there	 is	
need	 to	 	 conduct	 an	 assessment	 of	 students’	 learning	
outcomes	at	key	stages	of	the	education	cycle,	starting	
with	 Early	 Grade	 Reading	 and	Math	Assessments.	 In	
health,	there	is	lack	of	robust	information	at	community	
level,	 particularly	 in	 hard	 to	 reach	 areas.	 Conducting	
service	 delivery	 satisfaction	 surveys	 would	 also	 pro-
vide invaluable information on Government perfor-
mance	in	the	delivery	of	services,	particularly	in	hard	to	
reach	areas.	Finally,	it	also	not	been	possible	 to	assess	
the	potential	of	private	 sector	participation	 in	 the	pro-
vision	 of	 public	 goods.	 The	 Bank	 recently	 conducted	
such	 an	 assessment	 in	 the	 power	 sector	 as	 part	 of	 the	
PER.	Going	 forward,	 there	 is	need	 to	extend	 this	 type	
of	assessment	to	other	sectors	with	potential	for	private	
sector	participation	in	the	provision	of	services.

161. While the on-going PER has started filling some 
of the gaps on revenue and expenditure patterns 
in Myanmar, additional work will be warranted. 
It	has	not	been	possible	to	conduct	a	more	comprehen-
sive	 assessment	 of	 the	 level	 of	 Government	 revenues	
due	to	limited	knowledge	on	revenue	levels	from	Gems	
trade	and	 the	mining	 sector.	This	gap	will	be	filled	by	
a	comprehensive	analysis	of	revenues	from	the	mining	
sector	and	other	extractives	currently	planned	under	the	
EITI	support	program.	Similarly,	while	the	PER	shows	
that	SEEs	contribute	significantly	to	public	sector	rev-
enues,	a	more	detailed	analysis	is	warranted	in	order	to	
understand	the	different	contributions	of	various	SEEs.	
This	will	 help	 determine	 the	 potential	 implications	on	
Government	revenues,	of	the	various	types	of	SEE	re-
forms	 being	 envisaged	 by	 the	 Government,	 including	
corporatization	 and	 privatization.	 Finally,	 the	 sector	
level	PERs	on	health,	education,	and	energy	should	be	
expended	to	other	sectors	as	well,	particularly	agricul-
ture	and	transportation.	This	will	help	determine	priori-
ties	for	public	expenditure	in	these	sectors.

162. As mentioned earlier, knowledge gaps have made 
it difficult to identify priorities at a more granu-
lar level or make specific recommendations within 
sectors or thematic areas. For	example,	the	SCD	has	

highlighted	 the	 importance	 of	 increasing	 productivity,	
diversification,	and	value	addition.	However,	yield	data	
is	unreliable	and	there	is	little	information	on	the	status	
of	diversification	 in	 the	 country.	Therefore,	 a	 compre-
hensive	 and	 in-depth	 study	 on	 agriculture	 diversifica-
tion	 would	 be	 useful.	 A	 farm	 production	 economics	
study	 is	 planned	 by	 the	World	Bank.	The	 study	 seeks	
to	determine	farm	production	costs	in	Myanmar	which	
will	be	used	to	compare	the	likely	costs	and	benefits	of	
various	policy	interventions.	

163. A key area where additional analytical work is 
necessary before undertaking significant addition-
al public action is land reform. First,	 there	 is	 limit-
ed	knowledge	on	 the	relationship	between	 land	 tenure	
security	 and	 agriculture	 investment	 in	 Myanmar.	 An	
in-depth	 study	would	 therefore	 be	warranted.	Second,	
there	is	need	to	understand	the	full	scale	of	the	current	
land	problems	including	the	extent	to	which	complaints	
on	land	are	related	to	past	injustices	or	new	land	laws,	
the	transition,	and	other	policies	and	institutions.	More	
fundamentally,	there	is	need	to	understand	the	binding	
constraints	 to	 secure	 land	 tenure	 in	 Myanmar.	 Land	
governance	 is	 about	 power	 and	 the	 political	 economy	
of	 land.	 To	 understand	 the	 land-related	 problems	 that	
challenge	 Myanmar,	 and	 to	 appreciate	 the	 challenges	
facing	 land-sector	 reforms,	 it	 is	 therefore	necessary	 to	
understand	land’s	role	in	the	country’s	historic	political	
economy	and	the	history	of	land-related	legislation	and	
ownership.	 	 Land	 tenure	 arrangements	 involve	 social	
relations	and	social	institutions	and	have	complex	his-
tories,	 and	 are	multi-dimensional.42	 Therefore	 there	 is	

42 

 A range of frameworks, guidelines, and initiatives are now avail-

World Bank report | 53

need	 for	 a	 comprehensive	 assessment	 of	 the	 political	
economy	 of	 land	 in	 Myanmar	 and	 an	 analysis	 of	 op-
tions	 for	 land	 reform	 that	 draws	 on	 lessons	 from	 the	
experiences	 of	 other	 countries	 with	 various	 types	 of	
land	reform.	

164. Similarly, without robust information, specific 
and prioritized recommendations have not been 
possible in the areas of safety nets, financial sec-
tor, and access to microfinance. In	the	area	of	safety	
nets,	 it	will	 be	 important	 to	 conduct	 an	 assessment	 of	
government-led	safety	net	pilots	(such	as	stipends	and	
maternal	and	child	health	vouchers)	as	well	as	selected 
safety	 net	 programs	 being	 implemented	 by	 develop-
ment	 partners.	 It	 would	 also	 be	 useful	 to	 conduct	 a	
feasibility	 assessment	 for	 making	 benefit	 payments	
through	financial	institutions.	In	the	financial	sector,	the	
finalization	of	the	Financial	Sector	Master	Plan	current-
ly	 under	 preparation	 with	 help	 from	 the	 World	 Bank	
will	 be	 helpful.	 However,	 beyond	 preparation	 of	 the	
plan,	 a	 Financial	 Sector	Assessment	 Program	 will	 be	
warranted	in	order	to	gauge	the	stability	of	Myanmar’s	
financial	sector	and	assess	 its	potential	contribution	 to	
growth	and	development.	In	microfinance,	there	is	also	
need	for	a	comprehensive	assessment	of	the	industry	in	
order	to	understand	its	dynamics	including	the	scale	of	
demand	 for	 microfinance	 from	 micro	 enterprises	 and	
households.		

able to help conduct a thorough assessment of land governance such as the 
World Bank’s Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF), the UN’s 
Voluntary Guidelines on Land Governance, and the WB-UN global initiative 
on the Principles of Responsible Agricultural Investment

54 | World Bank report

BIBLIogRAPhY

Abe, M. & Molnar, M.  (2014),
“Myanmar Business Survey,” Survey Results, OECD & 
UNESCAP

Alderman, h. & R. Yemtsov (2013),
“Productive role of safety nets,” Social Protection Dis-
cussion Paper 67609, World Bank

Andrews, C., & Kryeziu, A. (2013). Public Works and 
the Jobs Agenda: Pathways for Social Cohesion. World 
Bank, Washington DC.

Transparency in the Oil and Gas Sector,” Arakan Oil 
Watch

Asia Society, (2010),
“Current Realities and Future Possibilities in Burma/ 
Myanmar: Perspectives from Asia”, Asia Society

Aung, n.M. (2012),
“Production and Economic Efficiency of Farmers and 
Millers in Myanmar Rice Industry,” V.R.F Series No. 
471, IDE, JETRO.

Andrews, C., A. Kryeziu and D. Seo (2013),
World Bank support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: 
A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services and Re-
sults, World Bank.

Barker, R., et al, (1985),
“Resources for the Future,” The Rice Economy of 
Asia, Volume 2, Washington DC in cooperation with 
The International Rice Research Institute, Manila.

Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2012),
“Myanmar: Summary of ADB’s Initial Sector 
Assessments,” ADB, Manila

ADB, (2012a), 
“Myanmar in Transition: Opportunities and Challeng-
es.”ADB, Manila. 

ADB, (2012b),
“Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector Assess-
ment, Strategy and Road Map.” Asian Development 
Bank, Manila. 

ADB, (2013),
“New Energy Architecture: Myanmar.” Asian Develop-
ment Bank, Manila, June 2013.

ADB, (2013),
“Myanmar Country Diagnostic Study: Policy Brief,” 
ADB, Manila

ADB, (2013),
“Myanmar’s Trade and its Potential,” ADB, Manila

ADB, (2014) “Myanmar Country Diagnostic Study”

Allan, D. (2013),
“Myanmar’s Energy Challenge: Business as Usual” is 
Not Working, Inclusion and Innovation Offer Access 
for All: An Essay/Compilation for Myanmar’s Energy 
Sector,” Consultation Report, Spectrum: Sustainable 
Development Knowledge Network 

Anukoonwattaka W. & Mikic M. (2012),
“Myanmar: Opening up to its Trade and Foreign Invest-
ment Potential,” Staff Working Paper 01/12, Trade and 
Investment Division, UNESCAP, Bangkok.

Arkan oil Watch, (2012),
“Burma’s Resource Curse: The Case for Revenue 

Baroang, K. (2013),
“Burma Bio-Physical Characterization: Summary 
Findings and Issues to Explore.” Center on Globaliza-
tion and Sustainable Development, Earth Institute at 
Columbia University. 

Berwin Leighton Paisner. (2013),
“Myanmar Foreign Investment Law, Foreign Invest-
ment Rules and Notification: Shining Light or Muddy 
Waters?” Berwin Leighton Paisner.

Bin, P. (2012),
“Political Economy of the Garments Sector,” Consul-
tancy Report, DFID.

Bissinger, J. (2012),
“Foreign Investment in Myanmar: A Resource Boom 
but a Development Bust?”, Contemporary Southeast 
Asia, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 23-52.

Bissinger, J. (2012),
“Firm Perceptions of Myanmar’s Business Climate,” 
International Academic Symposium, “Myanmar in 
Reform 2012” June 18-20, 2012

Border Consortium,
The. (2011), The Border Consortium Report. 

Burma Partnership (2012),
“We have Seen this Before”: Burma’s Fragile Peace 
Process,” Mae Sot, Thailand 

Business Monitor International, (2012),
“Myanmar Awakens: Unearthing Asia’s Hidden 
Gem”, Special Report, Business Monitor International 
Ltd.

Cambodia national Institute of Statistics, (2004),  
“Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey.”  Phnom Penh.

 
 
Callahan, M., & Steinberg, D. (2012),
“Drivers of Political Change in Post-Junta, Constitu-
tional Burma,” USAID

Central Statistical organization, (2009),
“Myanmar Statistical Yearbook,” Ministry of National 
Planning and Economic Development

Crandall, R. et al. (2007),
“The Effects of Broadband Deployment on Output 
and Employment: A Cross-sectional Analysis of U.S. 
Data.”

Dapice, D. et al., (2009),
“Assessment of the Myanmar Agricultural Economy,” 
Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: 
Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. et al., (2010),
“Revitalizing Agriculture in Myanmar: Breaking Down 
Barriers, Building a Framework for Growth,” Harvard 
Kennedy School, Ash Center for Democratic Gover-
nance and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. et al., (2011a),
‘‘Myanmar Agriculture in 2011: Old Problems and New 
Challenges’, Harvard Kennedy School, Ash Center 
for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard 
Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. et al., (2011b)
“The Exchange Rate in Myanmar: A Barrier to National 
Strength,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance and 
Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D., (2012a),
“Electricity in Myanmar: The Missing Prerequisite for 
Development,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance 
and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. (2012b),
“Electricity Demand and Supply in Myanmar,” Ash 
Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: 
Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. (2012c),
“The Exchange Rate in Myanmar: An Update to Janu-
ary 2012,” Ash Center for Democratic Governance and 
Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. et al. (2012d),
“Appraising the Post-Sanctions Prospects for Myan-
mar’s Economy: Choosing the Right Path,” Ash Center 
for Democratic Governance and Innovation: Harvard 
Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. (2013),
“Against the Odds: Building a Coalition – Using a New 
Federalism for Unity and Progress in Myanmar,” Ash 
Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: 
Harvard Kennedy School 

World Bank report | 55

`Dapice, D. (2012c),
“Myanmar: Negotiating Nation Building – A Path to 
Unity and Progress,” Ash Center for Democratic Gov-
ernance and Innovation: Harvard Kennedy School 

Dapice, D. (2013),
“Rice Policy in Myanmar: It’s Getting Complicated,” 
Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation: 
Harvard Kennedy School 

Dawe, D. (2013),
“Geographic Determinants of Rice Self-Sufficiency in 
Southeast Asia.” ESA Working Paper No. 13-03, Ag-
ricultural Development Economics Division, UN Food 
and Agriculture Organization. 

Delloite. (2012),
“The Potential Impact of Mobile Communications in 
Myanmar,” Consultancy Report prepared for Ericsson. 

Diamond L. et al. (2012),
“The Opening in Burma,” Journal of Democracy, Vol-
ume 23, Number 4.

Duflos E. et al. (2013),
“Microfinance in Myanmar Sector Assessment,” IFC 
Advisory Services in East Asia and the Pacific, IFC. 

Economist Intelligence Unit. (2012a),
“Myanmar: White Elephant or New Tiger Economy?” 
The Economist

Economist Intelligence Unit. (2012b),
“Country Report: Myanmar (Burma)” Economist Intel-
ligence Unit, London.

Engle P.L. et al. (2011),
“Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving 
developmental outcomes for young children in low-in-
come and middle-income countries” Lancet, 378(9799) 
pp.1339-53.

European Union & MDRI. (2013),
Myanmar EITI Guidebook

European Union. (2011),
“Baseline Study 4, Myanmar: Overview of Forest Law 
Enforcement, Governance and Trade, EU FLEGT Fa-
cility, European Forest Institute – FLEGT Asia Regional 
Office, Kuala Lumpur

Food and Agriculture organization. (2011),
“Myanmar and FAO: Achievements and Success Sto-
ries,” FAO Representation in Myanmar, Rome.

Food Security Working group (2012),
“Legal Review of Recently Enacted Farmland Law and 
Vacant, Fallow, and Virgin Lands Management Law: 
Improving the Legal & Policy Frameworks Relating to 
Land Management in Myanmar,” Food Security Work-
ing Group’s Land Core Group.

56 | World Bank report

global Justice Center. (2013),
“The Gender Gap and Women’s Political Power in 
Myanmar/Burma,” Global Justice Center, Human 
Rights Through the Rule of Law

IBAhRI. (2012),
“The Rule of Law in Myanmar: Challenges and Pros-
pects,” International Bar Association’s Human Rights 
Institute (IBAHRI), London.

goletti, F. (1999),
“Agricultural Diversification and Rural Industrialization 
as a Strategy for Rural Income Growth and Poverty 
Reduction in IndoChina and Myanmar,” Markets and 
Structural Studies Division, International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI).

government of Myanmar, ASEAn and Un (2008),
“Post Nargis Joint Assessment.”

government of Myanmar. (2009),
“Myanmar Action Plan on Disaster Risk Reduction, 
2009-2015,” Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Re-
settlement, Relief and Resettlement Department, Nay 
Pyi Taw.

International Crisis group. (2012),
“Myanmar: Storm Clouds on the Horizon,” Asia Report 
No. 238, International Crisis Group

International Crisis group. (2012),
“Myanmar: The Politics of Economic Reform,” Asia 
Report No. 231, International Crisis Group

International Crisis group. (2013),
“A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s Kachin State,” Asia 
Report No.140, International Crisis Group

International Finance Corporation. (2012),
“Microfinance in Myanmar: Rapid Sector 
Assessment,” Unpublished Report.

government of Myanmar & European Union. (2012), 
“ Education for All: Access to and Quality of Education 
in Myanmar,” Paper Presented at the Conference on 
Development Policy Options, 13-15 February, 2012, Nay 
Pyi Taw.

International Labor organization. (2005), 
“Key Indicators of the Labor Market,” fourth edition.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). (2012),
“A Review of the Public Finance Management System”

government of Myanmar & European Union. (2012), 
“Conference on Development Policy Options with Spe-
cial Reference to Education and Health in Myanmar,” 
Conference on Development Policy Options, 13-15 
February, 2012, Nay Pyi Taw.

herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., & Valentinyi, A. 
(2013). Growth and Structural Transformation, No. 
w18996. National Bureau of Economic Research.

hiebert, M. & nguyen, P. (2012),
“Land Reform: A Critical Test for Myanmar’s Gov-
ernment,” Center for Strategic International Studies, 
South East Asia from the Corner of 18th Street & K 
Street, Volume III, Issue 21.

hoddinott, J., et al. (2008),
The Impact of Nutrition during Early Childhood on 
Income, Hours Worked, and Wages of Guatemala 
Adults,” Lancet, Volume 371, pp. 411-16

horsey, R. (2013),
“The Current Status of the Ceasefires in Myanmar,” 
SSRC, Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum 

horsey, R. (2013),
“Amending the Myanmar Constitution,” SSRC, Conflict 
Prevention and Peace Forum 

hussmanns, (2004),
“Defining and Measuring Informal Employment,” Bu-
reau of Statistics International Labor Office.

IMF. (2012),
“Report on Government Financial Statistics”

IMF. (2012),
“Myanmar-Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consul-
tation”, IMF, Washington DC.

IMF. (2013),
“Myanmar-2013 Article IV Consultation and First 
Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program – Staff 
Report”, IMF Country Report No. 13/250IMF, Washing-
ton DC.

IMF. (2014),
“Second Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program 
– Staff Report”, IMF Country Report No. 14/91, IMF, 
Washington DC.

International organization for Migration. (2013),
“Assessing Potential Changes in the Migration Pat-
terns of Myanmar Migrants and Their Impact on Thai-
land,” International Organization for Migration and the 
Asian Research Center for Migration, Thailand.

Jones, L. (2014),
“The Political Economy of Myanmar’s Transition,” 
Journal of Contemporary Asia, No. 1 , pp. 144-70.

J.P Morgan, (2012),
“Myanmar: Clouds begin to Lift - History, Politics, 
Sanctions, Economics, and the Possibility of Change,” 
Asia Pacific Emerging Markets Research

World Bank report | 57

J.P Morgan, (2013),
“Myanmar: Gauging the Impact of Recent Economic 
Reforms,” Economic Research Global Data Watch

MgI. 2013.
“Myanmar’s Moment: Unique Opportunities, Major 
Challenges.” McKinsey Global Institute, June 2013. 

Kan Zaw, (2008),
“Challenges, Prospects and Strategies for CLMV De-
velopment: The Case of Myanmar,” in Sotharith, C. (ed), 
Development Strategy for CLMV in the Age of Econom-
ic Integration, ERIA Research Project Report 2007-4, 
Chiba: IDE-JETRO, pp. 443-496 

Katz, R. L. et al. (2010).
The Impact of Broadband on Jobs and the German 
Economy.

Korea Development Institute. (2012),
“Priority Assignments for Economic Development of 
Myanmar,” Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Seoul  

KPMg. (2013),
“Infrastructure in Myanmar,” KPMG Advisory (Myan-
mar) Ltd.

Kubo, K. (2012),
“Trade Policies and Trade Mis-reporting in Myanmar,” 
Institute of Developing Economies (IDE) Discussion 
Paper No. 326, Chiba, Japan

Kudo, T. (2009),
“Location Advantages and Disadvantages in Myanmar: 
The Case of Garment Industry,” IDE Discussion Paper 
No. 203, Chiba, Japan

Kudo, T., et al. (2012),
“Distribution of Myanmar Rice Mills in the Age of Eco-
nomic Integration.” In Economic Integration and the 
Location of Industries, The Case of Less Developed 
East Asian Countries, ed. Ikuo Kuroiwa.

Kudo, T. & Kumagai, S.  (2012),
“Two-Polar Growth Strategy in Myanmar: Seeking 
“High” and “Balanced” Development,” IDE Discussion 
Paper No. 371, Chiba, Japan

Kudo, T. & Kumagai, S.  (2013),
“Export-Oriented Growth Strategy for Myanmar Join-
ing East Asia’s Production Networks,” Policy Review 
Series on Myanmar Economy, No.09

Kubo, K. (2012),
“Restructuring the State Budget System for Disinfla-
tion and Exchange Rate Unification in Myanmar,” IDE 
Discussion Paper No. 320, Chiba, Japan

Lall, M. & South, A., (2012),
“Education, Conflict, and Identity: Non-State Ethnic 
Education Regimes in Burma.”  

Larkin, S. 2010.
“The Rice Supply Chain: Study of Yangon Port.” Work-
ing Paper.

Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT) 
Baseline Survey, 2012. nishino, Y. and  g. Koehler, 
(2011),
Myanmar development policy review: Social protection, 
UNICEF.

McMillan, M. S., & Rodrik, D. (2011).
Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity 
Growth (No. w17143). National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Marsh, P. (2014),
“Growth Diagnostics in Myanmar: What are the 
Most Binding Constraints to Private Sector Devel-
opment in Southeast Asia’s Final Fronier?”, MA 
Thesis, University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, Germany

McKinsey global Institute, (2013),
“Myanmar’s Moment: Unique opportunities, major 
challenges”, McKinsey & Company

Meehan, P. (2010),
The WASH Sector in Myanmar: Addressing the Chal-
lenge of Building Sustainable WASH Services. Wat-
erAid.

Mon M. (2000),
“Determinants of Female Labor Participation in Bur-
ma: An Empirical Analysis of Socio-Economic Survey 
Data,” ABAC Journal, Vol. 21, No. 1. 

Myanmar Legal Services Ltd (2013),
“Doing Business in Myanmar,” Myanmar Legal Ser-
vices Ltd.

nakanishi, Y. (2013),
“Post-1988 Civil-Military Relations in Myanmar,” IDE 
Discussion Paper No. 379, Chiba, Japan

nishino, Y. & Koehler g. (2011), “Social Protection in 
Myanmar: Making the Case for Holistic Policy Reform,” 
IDS Working Paper No 004, Vol. 2011, No. 386.

national Commission for Environmental Affairs 
(nCEA) et al. (2009), 
“National Sustainable Development Strategy for Myan-
mar” (2009)

nehru, V. (2012),
“Myanmar’s Economic Policy Priorities,” The Carnegie 
Papers, Carnegie Endowment

new Perimeter et al. (2013),
“Myanmar Rule of Law Assessment,” New Perimeter, 
Perseus Strategies, and The Jacob Blaustein for the 
Advancement of Human Rights

 
 
 
58 | World Bank report

nishino, Y. & g. Koehler (2011),
Myanmar development policy review: Social protection, 
UNICEF.

nixon, h. & Joelene, C. (2014),
“Fiscal Decentralization in Myanmar: Towards a Road-
map for Reform,” Discussion Paper No. 5, MDRI-CESD 
and The Asia Foundation

nixon, h. et al. (2013),
“State and Region Governments in Myanmar,” MDRI-
CESD and The Asia Foundation, Yangon

oECD. (2013a),
“Multi-dimensional Review of Myanmar: Volume I: 
Initial Assessment”, OECD

oECD. (2014),
OECD Investment Policy Reviews: Myanmar 2014,” 
OECD Publishing

okamoto, I. (2005),
“Transformation of the Rice Marketing System and 
Myanmar’s Transition to a Market Economy.” Insti-
tute of Developing Studies, December 2005.

okamoto, I. (2009),
“Transformation of the Rice Marketing System 
after Market Liberalization in Myanmar.” In The 
Economic Transition in Myanmar After 1988, Mar-
ket Economy versus State Control, eds. K. Fjita, F. 
Mieno, and I. Okamoto.

oo, U. T. h and T. Kudo. 2003. “Agro-Based Industry 
in Myanmar Prospects and Challenges.” Institute of 
Developing Economies, IDE-JETRO.

oxford Analytica. (2013), “Myanmar Central Bank 
Overhaul Exposes Reform Challenge,” Oxford Ana-
lytica Daily Brief, Friday, August 16, 2013.

oxford Analytica. (2013),
“Myanmar Political Buddhism to Shape Transition,”  
Oxford Analytica Daily Brief, Tuesday, June 25, 
2013.

Perkins, (2012),
“Industrial Policy Reform  in Myanmar,” Harvard 
Kennedy School ASH Center for Democratic Gov-
ernance and Innovation, and Rajawali Foundation 
Institute for Asia.

PWC. (2012),
“Myanmar: Business Guide”, Price Waterhouse 
Coopers, Singapore

Rieffel, L. (2012),
“The Myanmar Economy: Tough Choices,” Global 
Economy and Development, Working Paper 51

Robinson et al. (2007),
“The Irrawaddy River Sediment Flux to the Indian 
Ocean: The Original Nineteenth-Century Data Revisit-
ed”, The Journal of Geology, volume 115, pP. 629–640, 
The University of Chicago.

Rodrik, D. (2013).
Structural Change, Fundamentals and Growth: An 
Overview. Institute for Advanced Study, United States.

Saha, S. 2011.
“Working Through Ambiguity: International NGOs in 
Myanmar”. The Hauser Center for Nonprofit Organiza-
tions at Harvard University.

Sheehan, J. & greenlee. (2014),
“Doing Business in Myanmar,” Myanmar Insider, 
Volume 1, Issue 2, December-January, 2014, p. 4.

Slayton, T. 1984.
“Rice Trade and Economy of Selected Asian Coun-
tries.” Foreign Agriculture Circular, FAS/USDA.

Soe, n.Z. (2000),
“The Role of Agriculture in the Development of [the] 
Myanmar Economy,” MA Thesis, School of Public 
Policy and Management, Korea Development Institute, 
Seoul.

Soe, T. (Undated),
“Myanmar in Economic Transition: Constraints and 
Related Issues Affecting the Agriculture Sector,” 
Yangon University of Distance Education, Yangon, 
Myanmar

Soe, U. T. and B. Fisher. 1989.
“Burmese Rice Policies – An Economic Analysis of De-
velopments since Independence.” Paper presented at 
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Australian Agricul-
tural Economics Society, Christchurch, New Zealand, 
February 6-9, 1989.

Steinberg, D.I. (1997),
“Myanmar: The Anomalies of Politics and Economics,” 
Working Paper No. 5, The Asia Foundation Working 
Paper Series

Subbarao, K., C. et al. (2013),
“Public works as a safety net: Design, evidence and 
implementation,” World Bank. 

The Burma Environmental Working group. (2011), 
“Burma’s Environment: People, Problems, Policies,” 
Wanida Press: Chiang Mai

Thein, S. (2006),
“Agro-based Industries in Myanmar: The Long Road to 
Industrialization.” IDE, March 2006.

Thein, S. & Kudo, T. (2008),
“Myanmar Sugar SMEs: History, Technology, Location 

 
World Bank report | 59

and Government Policy,” IDE Discussion Paper No. 
147, Chiba, Japan

Thein, S. (2012),
“Industrial Readjustment in Myanmar: Agro-Indus-
trial Preparedness for Integrating with the AEC,” in 
Industrial Readjustment in the Mekong River Ba-
sin Countries: Toward the AEC, edited by Ueki. Y & 
Bhongmakapat, BRC Research Report No. 7, Bangkok 
Research Center, IDE-JETRO, Bangkok.

Vriens & Partners. (2012),
“Political Analysis of Myanmar’s New Foreign Invest-
ment Law,” Vriens & Partners, Yangon.

Winn, K. 1991. “A Century of Rice Improvement in Bur-
ma.” The International Rice Research Institute, Manila.

Women’s Protection Technical Working group. (2010), 
“Women’s Protection Assesments: Post Cyclone Nar-
gis, Myanmar.” 

Timmer, P. (2012),
“Rice Consumption: Changing Preferences and Impli-
cations for the Industry.” Presented at the World Bank 
Workshop on Rice and Risk in Asia, HCMC Vietnam, 
October 17-18, 2012.

Wong, L., and E. Wai. 2013.
“Rapid Value Chain Assessment: Structure and Dy-
namics of the Rice Value Chain in Burma.” Background 
paper 6 for the USAID-sponsored “Strategic Agricul-
tural Sector and Food Security Diagnostic.”

Turnell, S. (2011),
“Fundamentals of Myanmar’s Macroeconomy: A Po-
litical Economy Perspective,” Asian Economic Policy 
Review, 6, pp. 136–153

Turnell, S., (Undated),
“Burma’s Poverty of Riches: Natural Gas and the Vora-
cious State”

Turnell, S., (2008),
“Burma’s Economy 2008: Current Situation and 
Prospects for Reform,” Burma Economic Watch, 
Economics Department, Macquarie University, Sidney, 
Australia

Turnell, S., (2010),
“Dissecting the Data: Burma’s Macroeconomy at the 
Cusp of the 2010 ‘Elections’,” Economics Department, 
Macquarie University, Sidney, Australia

Woods, K., (2013),
“Emerging Agribusiness Trends in Myanmar: An Over-
view,” Kunming: Yunnan University Press.

World Bank, (1985),
“Burma:  Policies and Prospects for Economic Adjust-
ment and Growth,” Country Report 4814-BA.

World Bank (1993),
“Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Review, Myan-
mar”, Washington D.C.

World Bank (1995),
“Myanmar: Policies for Sustaining Economic Reform” 
Country Economic Report, Washington D.C.

World Bank. (2011),
“World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, 
and Development,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Turnell, S., (2011),
“Fundamentals of Myanmar’s Macroeconomy: A Po-
litical Economy Perspective,” Asian Economic Policy 
Review, 6, pp.136-153

World Bank. (2012a),
“Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT) 
Baseline Survey,” World Bank and Livelihood and Food 
Security Fund.

Un (2007).
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrim-
ination Report. 

World Bank. (2012b),
“World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and 
Development,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

UnDP. (2011),
Integrated Households Living Conditions Survey in 
Myanmar (2009-2010) Poverty Profile, IHLCA Project 
Technical Unit, Yangon. 

UnICEF (2011),
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2009-2010, Myanmar.

UnoDC (2013),
Opium Survey.

Vokes, R. & goletti, F. (2013),
“Agriculture and Rural Development in Myanmar: 
Policy Issues and Challenges,”Agrifood Consulting 
International, Kensington, Maryland, U.S.A.

World Bank & MDRI. (2012),
“Qualitative Social and Economic Monitoring reports,” 
LIFT

World Bank. (2013a),
“Social Assessment for Myanmar Decentralizing Fund-
ing to Schools Project,” Yangon

World Bank. (2013b),
“Poverty Assessment Note.” Draft Report, October 18, 
2013 Version. Yangon, Myanmar.

World Bank. (2013c),
“Diagnostic of the Myanmar Agricultural Development 
Bank.” Draft version as of October 15, 2013, World 

60 | World Bank report

Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. (2013d),
“Global Monitoring Report 2013:  Rural-Urban Dynam-
ics and the Millennium Development Goals” World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. (2013e),
“Program Document for a Proposed Credit in the 
Amount of SDR 287.75 million to the Republic of the 
Union of Myanmar for a Reengagement and Reform 
Support Program,” World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank. (2013f),
“Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Pros-
perity,” Social Development, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

World Bank & IFC. (2013),
“Doing Business 2013,” Doing Business Survey Report 
Comparing Business Regulations for Domestic Firms 
in 185 Economies, World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. (2014a),
“Myanmar: Capitalizing on Rice Export Opportunities,” 
Economic and Sector Work Report No. 85804, Sus-
tainable Development Network, East Asia and Pacific 
Region, World, Washington, DC.

World Bank. (2014b),
“The State of Social Safety Nets 2014,” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

World Bank. (Forthcoming),
“Myanmar: Public Expenditure Review – Education”. 

World Development Report (2012), 
Young, K. et al. (1998),
“An Economic Assessment of the Myanmar Rice Sec-
tor: Current Developments and Prospects,” Research 
Bulletin 958, Arkansans Agricultural Experiment 
Station, University of Arkansas.

Zuijlen, M., (2006),
“Assessing Gender Equality in Myanmar,” Gender As-
sessment Undertaken for DFID South East Asia

Table A. 1: List of knowledge and data gaps that need to be filled

AnnEX 

World Bank report | 61

62 | World Bank report

World Bank report | 63

64 | World Bank report

Table A. 2: Summary of SCD consultation meetings and key focus areas identified by stakeholders

World Bank report | 65

66 | World Bank report

World Bank report | 67

Report No. 93050-MM

MYANMAR

NOVEMBER,
2 0 1 4

Ending poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity in a time 
of transition

Photo by: Ni Ni Myint/World Bank, 2014

World Bank Office Yangon

No.57, Pyay Road
(Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road)
61/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
+95 (1) 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar

A SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC

